The Crimson Rivers 2001 Cast
Jean Reno as Pierre Niemans
Vincent Cassel as Max Kerkerian
Nadia Fares as Fanny Ferreira
Laurent Avare as Remy Caillois
Written by Mathieu Kassovitz
Jean-Christophe Grange Based On The Novel by
Grange Crime, Foreign, Mystery, Thriller
Rated R For Violence and Grisly Images, and Language
105 minutes "If the makers of the next Hannibal Lecter picture dont hire"
Mathieu Kassovitz
to direct it, they\re mad. His new thriller "The Crimson Rivers" is a breathtaking exercise in the macabre, a gruesome thriller with quirky cops and a killer of Lecterian complexity, and even when the movie is perfect nonsense, it\s so voluptuous that you\re grateful to be watching it anyway. This is the work of a natural filmmaker.
The film begins with parallel stories involving two cops, who eventually meet. One is Niemans 
Jean Reno
, a famed investigator from Paris, such a lone wolf that when he\s asked about his unit, he says, "I\m the unit." The other is Kerkerian 
Vincent Cassel
, a provincial policeman.
Niemans is investigating the murder of a man who is found hanging 150 feet in the air in the fetal position, blinded, his hands amputated. Kerkerian is investigating the desecration of a tomb containing a child whose mother said she was killed by the devil.
The investigations are in a spectacularly forlorn valley in the French Alps, where a famous university clings to the slopes. The children of its teachers go to school here, and eventually become professors themselves; there are hints of problems with inbreeding. The university dean is the "mayor of the valley," and he haughtily tells Niemans: "We all live in perfect harmony. To accuse one of us is to accuse all of us, including me."
Niemans has nobody he wants to accuse. The murder is baffling. "The hands and eyes are the body parts that belong to us alone," the surgeon tells him after the autopsy, adding that in his opinion the victim was tortured for hours. Plodding through his investigation, morose, inward, afraid of dogs, Niemans meets Kerkerian and then meets him again. Why do their two cases seem to lead to the same places?
The movie is as good-looking as any film this year. It is cold, wet and gray, like "
The Silence of the Lambs
," and its mountain fastness doesn\t look like a place for a ski holiday, but like a place where you could be lost and never found. Kassovitz\s camera gives us the sensation of these peaks and altitudes by moving with uncanny grace through high empty spaces: There was one shot that had me frankly baffled about where the camera could possibly be positioned.
Notice, too, how an innocuous visit to a university library somehow becomes a venture into the research room of hell. The room is architecturally beautiful so is the university--Guernon, in Modane-Avrieux, but Kassovitz and his cinematographer,
Thierry Arbogast
", somehow light it and move through it so that every innocent student seems to glance up from satanic studies. The entire university--the grounds, the labs, the deans office--has this unwholesome quality, and if you could figure out how Kassovitz does it youd learn something about the craft of filmmaking, because he starts with a picture postcard."
"The two cops establish a grumpy, monosyllabic relationship, based on the isolationist Niemans gradual realization that Kerkerian is not a complete fool. There is a moment when they visit a grubby little rental apartment where somehow Kassovitz conjures suspense out of thin air. And a scene where Niemans and a local woman mountaineer lower themselves down a sheer ice face to find a 10-year-old sample of acid rain, needed as a clue. They find another clue: a second victim."
All of this, alas, eventually yields a solution to the mystery.
Along the way we have been much too interested in current developments to bother formulating our own hypothesis. When the answer comes, it comes all in a package, like one of Sherlock Holmes\ wrap-ups for the admiring Watson. The dialogue is such a rush, indeed, that I was reminded of Russ Meyer\s analysis of "Vixen\: "I put all the socially redeeming stuff in one speech at the end, so the audience knows when that comes on, it\s safe to leave."
"What Kassovitz may be doing here, consciously or not, is demonstrating that we go to a mystery thriller for the wind up, not the delivery. All the fun is in the atmosphere, the set-up, the surprises and murky sense of danger. The whodunit part is usually either a too predictable, or b so unpredictable its a cheat."
Joseph Conrad said he didn\t like popular adventure stories because they were all based on accidents -- random adventures, not generated by the nature of the characters. For almost all of its length, "The Crimson Rivers" is anchored by the natures of Niemans and Kerkerian, as tested by criminal events.
"Kassovitz holds off telling us whodunit as long as possible, and then grits his teeth like a runner who finds a puddle at the finish line. Look at this movie and tell me this director shouldnt have a date with"
Anthony Hopkins
.

Flash Gordon 1980 Cast
Melody Anderson as Dale Arden
Topol as Dr. Zarkov
Max von Sydow as Emperor Ming
Ornella Mull as Princess Aura
Timothy Dalton as Prince Barin
Mariangela Melato as Kala
Action, Adventure, Comedy, Fantasy, Science Fiction Rated PG
111 minutes Not since "Infra-Man" has a movie opened with a\r\ndevelopment more ominous than the crisis facing Earth at the beginning of\r\n"Flash Gordon." But Earth scientists are playing it cool: A NASA\r\nspokesman denies that there\s anything unusual about an unexpected total\r\neclipse of the sun. Unusual? That the moon is out of its orbit? Ha! It takes a\r\nmad scientist like Dr. Hans Zarkov to realize that the Earth is under attack,\r\nand speed to the rescue in his private space ship-with Flash Gordon and Dale\r\nArden aboard as unwilling passengers.
If\r\nmemory serves, this is more or less the same beginning as in the original movie\r\nserialization of "Flash Gordon," back in 1936. Even if it\s not, this\r\nnew
Dino De Laurentiis
production is true to the tacky pop origins of the Flash\r\nGordon comic strip and the serials starring Buster Crabbe. At a time when\r\n"Star Wars" and its spin-offs have inspired special effects men to\r\nbust a gut making their interplanetary adventures look real, "Flash\r\nGordon" is cheerfully willing to look as phony as it is.
I\r\nDON\T mean that as a criticism. You can make a city float in the clouds and\r\nlook marginally realistic as in "
The Empire Strikes Back
", but\r\nthere\s something sort of fun about the "Flash Gordon" city that\r\nfloats in the clouds and looks like a large miniature model floating in fake\r\nclouds. And as the spaceships lumber past on the screen, I really wouldn\t have\r\nminded if they\d left a tube of model airplane glue lying in the lower\r\nleft-hand corner.
"Flash\r\nGordon" is played for laughs, and wisely so. It is no more sophisticated\r\nthan the comic strip it\s based on, and that takes the curse off of material\r\nthat was old before it was born. This is space opera, a genre invented by Edgar\r\nRice Burroughs and Hugo Gernsback and other men of unlimited imagination\r\nharnessed to definitely limited skills. It\s fun to see it done with energy and\r\nlove and without the pseudo-meaningful apparatus of the Force and Trekkie\r\nPower.
The\r\nplot is simple: The Emperor Ming Max von Sydow, bored with life in the\r\nuniverse, decides to pick on Earth. After warming up with a few hurricanes and\r\nearthquakes, he sends the moon spinning down toward the planet. Meanwhile,\r\nZarkov, Flash Sam J. Jones, last seen as Bo Derek\s husband in "10"\r\nand Dale 
Melody Anderson
" crash-land in Mings imperial space city. There are\r\nintrigues afoot, but meanwhile Dale catches Mings eye, he determines to marry\r\nher, and Flash finds himself fighting for his life with a gladiator."
"Mike\r\nHodges, the British director hired by De Laurentiis to orchestrate this comic\r\nspace opera, is true to the visual tradition Of the, original serials: Everyone\r\nis dressed in capes and ridiculous boots and headdresses, and stand, around on\r\nthe command decks of ornate space ships. Theres an imperial court to applaud\r\nand boo at the appropriate times."
And\r\nthere\s a cliff-hanging showdown when the Hawk Men, looking amazingly like the\r\nwinged angels in De Laurentiis\ production as "Barbarella" 1968,\r\nengage the crew of a space ship in hand-to-hand battle you know there\s\r\nsomething lacking with the Ming technology when the commander of the rocket ship\r\nshouts "Stand by to the repel invaders!". Is all of this ridiculous?\r\nOf course. Is it fun? Yeah, sort of, it is.

Startup.Com 2001 Directed by
Chris Hegedus Jehane Noujaim
Documentary Rated NR
Unobjectionable, But Intended For Mature Audiences 103 minutes
The friends are named Kaleil Isaza Tuzman and Tom Herman. Their idea is so compelling that Tuzman quits a job at Goldman Sachs to move to the Internet. The story starts in May 1999, when instant Web millionaires were a dime a dozen, and ends in January 2001. The documentary\s last shots were filmed only three weeks before it premiered at Sundance, still wet from the lab. As an inside view of the bursting of the Internet bubble, "Startup.com" is definitive. We sense there were lots of stories more or less like this one.
To film this sort of doc, you need access. The movie has it. One co-director,
Jehane Noujaim
", was Tuzmans Harvard roommate. Shes also the cinematographer, and her digital camera has access to startlingly private moments. The other director,"
Chris Hegedus
, has worked on such insider docs as "
The War Room
," the story of Bill Clinton\s 1992 presidential campaign. She co-produced that one with D.A. Pennebaker, the legendary documentarian, who is also the producer this time.
"When the film begins, the new company doesnt even have a name. They settle on govWorks.com. Tuzman and Herman make the rounds of venture capitalists, and its obvious that Tuzman is the expert pitcher, while Herman, more technically oriented, drives his partner crazy by bringing up bright ideas in meetings on the spur of the moment. Tuzman lectures him to stay on message. Dollar signs dance before their eyes. At one point in Boston theyre offered $17 million but lose the deal when they cant get their lawyers on the phone."
"Meanwhile, of course, theres the problem of actually writing the software. It would seem to me that paying parking tickets over the Internet would involve basic programming skills plus cosmetic packaging, but no, apparently its rocket science: Eventually govWorks.com has 200 employees working on the site, and still Tuzman despairs that its not good enough to be released to the public. How does a guy like James Berardinelli open one of the best movie review sites on the Web all by himself, and 200 people cant figure out how to collect parking tickets? Berardinelli even writes his own reviews."
Famous figures float in and out of view. The partners smile from the covers of business magazines. Former Atlanta Mayor Maynard Jackson turns up as a consultant. Tuzman appears on TV sitting next to Clinton, who chairs a summit meeting on the Internet. Meanwhile, Tuzman and Herman, under enormous pressure, go through girlfriends and beards. Herman grows his beard and shaves it off so many times that the filmmakers finally photograph him in front of the mirror with a razor, just to explain the continuity errors. And Tuzman\s girlfriends complain that he pays them no attention: "Just a call is all I ask," one says. "A simple call saying you\re thinking of me, you\re busy, but you miss me. That would keep me going for two weeks." She disappears from the film; her replacement also finds Tuzman a moving target.
"There are setbacks. The govWorks office is broken into. Files are stolen. But thats not as big a problem as the disappointing software, and then comes the dot-com meltdown that dries up funds just when the site is turning the corner. On the day govWorks was sold to a competitor, we learn, it landed the big New York City contract."
Noujaim\s camera catches painfully intimate moments as the two old friends argue, split, and Herman leaves the company; in an age-old security ritual, he is "escorted from the building" and guards are told not to readmit him. Today, I learn, Tuzman and Herman are back in business together. My guess is, they could make it this time. The Internet is fundamentally sound. The bubble had to burst to correct its crazy over-valuation. Now that sanity has returned, bright guys like Tuzman and Herman can find more opportunities. All they need is another great idea. And better software.

Smoke Signals 1998 Cast
Adam Beach as Victor Joseph
Evan Adams as Thomas Builds-The-Fire
Irene Bedard as Suzy Song
Gary Farmer as Arnold Joseph
Tantoo Cardinal as Arlene Joseph
Directed by Chris Eyre
Written by Sherman Alexie
Comedy, Drama Rated PG-13
For Some Intense Images 89 minutes
"It\s a good day to be indigenous!\\ the reservation radio deejay tells his American Indian listeners as "Smoke Signals\\ opens. We cut to the station\s traffic reporter, who scrutinizes an intersection that rarely seems to be used. "A big truck just went by,\\ he announces. Later in the film, we will hear several choruses of a song about
John Wayne
"s false teeth."
"Smoke Signals\\ comes billed as the first feature written, directed, co-produced and acted by American Indians. It hardly seems necessary to even announce that: The film is so relaxed about its characters, so much at home in their world, that we sense it\s an inside job. Most films about Native Americans have had points to make and scores to settle, like all those earnest 1950s white films about blacks. Blaxploitation broke the ice and liberated unrehearsed black voices, and now here are two young Indians who speak freshly, humorously and for themselves.
"The film opens in Idaho on a significant day: the Fourth of July, 1976. Its significant not only for America but for the infant Thomas Builds-the-Fire, who is saved by being thrown from an upper window when his house burns down at 3 a.m. He is caught in the arms of Arnold Joseph "
Gary Farmer
, a neighbor with a drinking problem, who is eventually thrown out by his wife 
Tantoo Cardinal
 and goes to live in Phoenix. He leaves behind his son Victor Joseph 
Adam Beach
.
And then, 20 years later, word comes that Arnold has died. Victor has a deep resentment against his father, but thinks he should go to Phoenix and pick up his ashes. He has no money for the journey, but Thomas Builds-the-Fire 
Evan Adams
 does--and offers to buy the bus tickets if Victor will take him along on the trip. That would be a big concession for Victor, who is tall and silent and has never much liked the skinny, talkative Thomas. But he has no choice. And as the movie settles into the rhythms of a road picture, the two characters talk, and the dialogue becomes the heart of the movie.
"Smoke Signals\\ was written by
Sherman Alexie
, based on his book "The Lone Ranger and Tonto Fistfight in Heaven.\\ He has a good ear for speech, and he allows his characters to refer to the real world, to TV and pop culture and the movies. The reserved Victor, impatient with Thomas\s chatter, accuses him of having learned most of what he knows about Indians by watching "Dances with Wolves,\\ and advises him to spend more time "looking stoic.\\ There are references to Gen. Custer and the U.S. Cavalry, to John Wayne and to U.S. policies toward Indians over the years, but "Smoke Signals\\ is free of the oppressive weight of victim culture; these characters don\t live in the past and define themselves by the crimes committed against their people. They are the next generation; I would assign them to Generation X if that didn\t limit them too much.
"If they are the future, Arnold, the Gary Farmer character, is the past. Victor nurses a resentment against him, but Joseph is understandably more open-minded, since the man did, after all, save his life. There are a few flashbacks to help explain the older man, and although theyre brief, theyre strong and well done: We see that Arnold is more complicated than his son imagines, and able to inspire the respect of the woman he was living with in Phoenix "
Irene Bedard
.
"Smoke Signals\\ is, in a way, a continuation of a 1989 movie named "Powwow Highway,\\ in which Farmer starred as a huge, gentle, insightful man, and A Martinez as more "modern.\\ It, too, was a road movie, and it lived through its conversations. To see the two movies side-by-side is to observe how Native Americans, like all Americans, are not exempt from the melting pot--for better and worse.
The director,
Chris Eyre
", takes advantage of the road movie genre, which requires only a goal and then permits great freedom in the events along the way. The two men will eventually obtain the ashes, we expect, and also some wisdom. Meanwhile, we can watch them discover one another: the taciturn, inward man who was abused as a child, and the orphan who, its true, seems to have gotten his world view at secondhand through the media."
There\s a particular satisfaction in listening to people talk about what they know well and care about. The subject isn\t as important as the feeling. Listen to them discuss the ins and outs of an Indian specialty known as "frybread,\\ and you will sense what they know about the world.

No Good Deed 2003 Cast
Samuel J. Jackson as Jack Friar
Milla Jovovich as Erin
Stellan Skarsgard as Tyrone
Grace Zabriskie as Mrs. Quarre
Jonathan Higgins as David Brewster
Directed by Bob Rafelson
Written by Christopher Canaan
Steve Barancik Based On
Action, Crime, Drama, Mystery, Thriller Rated R
Violence, Language, Sexuality 103 minutes
FILM CRITIC Bob Rafelson\s two best movies are "
Five Easy Pieces
" 1970 and "
The Postman Always Rings Twice
" 1981, and his new film "No Good Deed" is like a mingling of their themes. From "Postman" comes hard-boiled American crime fiction, and from "Five Easy Pieces" and its musical family comes the cop played by
Samuel L. Jackson
, a diabetic who plays the cello. He is, in fact, looking forward to a week at a "fantasy camp" where he can play with Yo-Yo Ma, when fate intervenes.
"Jacksons character, Jack Friar, is asked by a friend to help find her runaway daughter. Hes assigned to grand theft auto and usually finds runaway cars, but he postpones his vacation to ask around in the last neighborhood where the girl was seen, and that leads him to help out Mrs. Quarre, a sweet little old lady who has fallen on her steps with bags of groceries. Once inside her house, he discovers the little old lady is not sweet, and that her criminal partners think the cop is looking for them. So they tie him to a chair, where he will spend most of the movie."
The story is based on "The House on Turk Street," a 1924 short story by Dashiell Hammett, whose work also inspired "
The Maltese Falcon
" and "
The Thin Man
." The noir origins are evident in Jackson\s resigned, laconic hero, and in the character of Erin 
Milla Jovovich
, with a blond Veronica Lake haircut, who guards Jack, talks to him and eventually joins in a scene that improbably combines sex and the art of cello playing.
Friar, who was only trying to do a good deed, has walked into the final stages of a bank robbery. A gang led by the precise Tyrone 
Stellan Skarsgard
 and including the violent hothead Hoop Doug Hutchinson is about to commit a multimillion-dollar computer fraud with the help of an inside man named David 
Jonathan Higgins
, a bank official who thinks Erin is in love with him.
More than one man shares that misapprehension, including Hoop, who thinks he and Erin will do away with Tyrone and skip with the money. And Tyrone, who trusts Erin to stay with him. To be sure, she left him once before, but "this is how Tyrone says you shouldn\t have left," Erin says, showing Jack Friar a foot with four toes.
As Erin and Jack wait in the house for the bank robbery to take place, the old couple are at an airport. Mr. Quarre 
Joss Ackland
 is a feisty old fart who has a pipe collection and memories of flying a lot of missions in Korea, and has been signed up to fly the robbers to the Bahamas. Mrs. Quarre 
Grace Zabriskie
, who was the angry hitchhiker in "Five Easy Pieces", is along for the ride; as they wait in the rain for their passengers to turn up, they make love in the plane, which is more than any of Erin\s men can claim.
"The long delay gives Jack and Erin an opportunity to share secrets. Turns out Tyrone brought Erin over from Russia, where she was a piano prodigy, which she proves with a solo. Then she releases Jack long enough for a surprisingly erotic cello duet, involving only one cello, that eludes the question: Why doesnt Jack overpower her and escape? Later, tied up again, he tries to burn through his cords by holding his feet over a flame on the kitchen range; its surprising how painful and effective that scene is."
"In a story based on double-crosses, the possibility emerges that Jack and Erin could make a deal on their own. But can Erin be trusted by anyone? The movies ending strikes an unsentimental note that remembers the cynicism of classic film noir. And its look is noir, too; cinematographer Juan Ruiz-Anchia seems inspired by the paintings of Jack Vettrianno with his shadowy interiors glowing with reds, golds and oranges."
The movie doesn\t rank with Rafelson\s best work, which also includes the crime melodrama "Blood and Wine" 1996, with
Jack Nicholson
and
Jennifer Lopez
". But its an absorbing, atmospheric noir with nice little touches, including Skarsgards speech patterns, the jolly greed of the Quarres, and the way that the cop and the blond relate to each other on three levels: as prisoner and captor, as man and woman, and as musicians."

The Vertical Ray Of The Sun 2001 Cast
Tran Nu Yen-Khe as Lien
Nguyen Nhu Quynh as Suong
Le Khanh as Khanh
Quang Hai as Hai Ngo
Written and Directed by Tran Anh Hung
Drama, Foreign, Romance Rated NR
Mild Sexuality; Suitable For Mature Audiences 112 minutes
"The Vertical Ray of Sun is beautiful, languorous, passive--it plays like background music for itself. Filmed in a Hanoi that looks more like an Asian love hotel than a city, its a lush, sensuous work--the film equivalent of those old Mantovani albums with names like Music for Lovers Only. It tells the stories of three sisters, two married, one single, and although it contains adulteries in the present, rumors of adultery in the past, one or perhaps two pregnancies and a hint of incestuous feelings, it would be fair to say that hardly anything happens."
"Let me describe one shot. In the left foreground, a woman reclines on a bed. In the right background, a man looks out the window. It is raining. He is smoking. She lights a cigarette. For a time nothing happens except for the pleasure they take in silent companionship and smoking together. This time, passing in this intimacy without words, is a moment that says so much about their comfort in each others company that we realize most movies are about people who are doing instead of being . Little surprise that the director,"
Tran Anh Hung
, grew up in Paris to love the work of
Robert Bresson
, that French master of films that were about the essence, not the adventures, of his characters. Tran was born in Vietnam, moved to France with his family at the age of 6, and made the remarkable debut film "
The Scent Of Green Papaya
"\xa0in 1993, when he was still in his 20s. It was the love story of a simple servant girl and a sophisticated rich boy, and it was set in French-ruled Saigon--a Saigon created for the film, astonishingly, entirely on a Parisian sound stage. Then came a trip to Vietnam to film \\Cyclo,\\ a rougher, more realistic story about street life in what had become Ho Chi Minh City. Now here is \\The Vertical Ray of the Sun,\\ filmed in Hanoi, but a Hanoi no more realistic than the Paris in MGM musicals like "
An American in Paris
." \xa0\\I wanted my film to feel like a caress,\\ Tran told Trevor Johnston of the London Independent. \\It had to have a gentle smile floating through it, a sort of floating feeling.\\ He wanted to find a style, he said, \\which didn\t present the drama as a series of emotional problems for the various couples.\\ He has been so successful that his film may be maddening for those who expect conflict in their movies. The various couples do, in fact, have emotional problems, but they live in a sea of such emotional contentment that unhappiness is a wave that crests briefly and falls back, forgotten.
We meet three sisters. Lien, the youngest, is played by
Tran Nu Yen-Khe
", who is Trans wife and was the star of Green Papaya. She still lives at home with her twin brother, Hai Ngo"
Quang Hai
". At times they chase each other around the house like children. At other times he awakens to find her in his bed because she got lonely in the night. People think we are courting, she says with delight as they walk in the street. They talk about what he would do if she ever got married. This is emotional, not physical incest."
Their older sister Khanh 
Le Khanh
" is married to a novelist who says he is stuck on the ending of a novel which may not even have a beginning. She has, for me, the most luminous moment in the movie, in a close two-shot where she is filled with something she wants to say, and then says it: She is pregnant. Do you know how a womans lips look when she delays with delight, holding back happy news? The pause before she speaks is a moment of such beauty. The third sister is Suong "
Nguyen Nhu Quynh
, whose husband is obsessed with his photographs of rare plant species.
Sometimes, she says, she thinks he cares more about his plants than about her. Actually, he also cares about another woman he lives with secretly on the island where he collects his specimens; they have a child. The nature of his life explains his long absences to both women, but Suong has a breathtaking scene where she tells him what she knows, how she knows it, and what she expects him to do about it.
"The title, which can also be translated as At the Height of Summer, captures a season of heat and humidity when motion is to be avoided and the most luxurious time of the day is waking while it is still cool. The sisters meet to prepare meals, gossip, confess and speculate. The men are more vaguely drawn. The film finds it so unnecessary to conclude and solve the characters problems that after its over you may not be able to remember if it did. It is not about incident, but about nostalgia for the slowness and peace of days past."
"Here is Tran again, in the London interview: My thoughts turned back to my childhood in DaNang, remembering the time when Id be waiting to fall asleep at night, my mind racing from one thing to another, nothing precise. The smell of fruit coming in through the window, a womans voice singing on the radio. Everything was so vague. It was like a feeling of suspension. If Ive ever experienced harmony in my life it was then. It was just a matter of translating that rhythm and that musicality into the new film. Reading those words, I was reminded of a little-known but evocative film by"
Robert Altman
named "
Thieves Like Us
"\xa01974 in which, in a small frame house in the summertime, on Sunday afternoon perhaps, the characters sit dozing in easy chairs and from a distant room comes the sound of a song on the radio. On such warm and idle afternoons there is the possibility that love-making lies ahead, or perhaps it lies behind; it is too much to think about just now.

Beyond the Valley of the Dolls 1980 Cast
Dolly Read as Kelly McNamara
Cynthia Myers as Casey Anderson
Marcia McBroom as Petronella Danforth
David Gurian as Harris Allsworth
Michael Blodgett as Lance Rocke
Edy Williams as Ashley St. Ives
Erica Gavin as Roxanne
Phyllis Davis as Susan Lake
Charles Napier as Baxter Wolfe
Harrison Page as Emerson Thorne
Produced and Directed by Russ Meyer
Comedy, Drama, Erotic, Musical, Thriller Rated X
109 minutes * Ebert\s Note: "Beyond the Valley of the\r\nDolls," a movie for which I wrote the screenplay in 1969, has over the\r\nyears become a cult film. Although it would not be appropriate for me to review\r\nit or give it a star rating, I offer the following observations written for\r\nFilm Comment magazine on the occasion of the movie\s 10th anniversary in 1980.
Remembered\r\nafter 10 years, "Beyond the Valley of the Dolls" seems more and more\r\nlike a movie that got made by accident when the lunatics took over the asylum.\r\nAt the time
Russ Meyer
and I were working on "BVD" I didn\t really\r\nunderstand how unusual the project was. But in hindsight I can recognize that\r\nthe conditions of its making were almost miraculous. An independent X-rated\r\nfilmmaker and an inexperienced screenwriter were brought into a major studio\r\nand given carte blanche to turn out a satire of one of the studio\s own hits.\r\nAnd "BVC" was made at a time when the studio\s own fortunes were so\r\nlow that the movie was seen almost fatalistically, as a gamble that none of the\r\nstudio executives really wanted to think about, so that there was a minimum of\r\nsupervision or even cognizance from the Front Office.
We\r\nwrote the screenplay in six weeks flat, laughing maniacally from time to time,\r\nand then the movie was made. Whatever its faults or virtues, "Beyond the\r\nValley of the Dolls" is an original -- a satire of Hollywood conventions,\r\ngenres, situations, dialogue, characters and success formulas, heavily overlaid\r\nwith such shocking violence that some critics didn\t know whether the movie\r\n"knew" it was a comedy.
Although\r\nMeyer had been signed to a three-picture deal by 20th Century-Fox, I wonder\r\nwhether at some level he didn\t suspect that "BVD" would be his best\r\nshot at employing all the resources of a big studio at the service of his own\r\nhighly personal vision, his world of libidinous, simplistic creatures who\r\ninhabit a pop universe. Meyer wanted everything in the screenplay except the\r\nkitchen sink. The movie, he theorized, should simultaneously be a satire, a\r\nserious melodrama, a rock musical, a comedy, a violent exploitation picture, a\r\nskin flick and a moralistic expose so soon after the
Sharon Tate
murders of\r\nwhat the opening crawl called "the oft-times nightmarish world of Show\r\nBusiness."
What\r\nwas the correct acting style for such a hybrid? Meyer directed his actors with\r\na poker face, solemnly, discussing the motivations behind each scene. Some of\r\nthe actors asked me whether their dialogue wasn\t supposed to be humorous, but\r\nMeyer discussed it so seriously with them that they hesitated to risk offending\r\nhim by voicing such a suggestion. The result is that "BVD" has a\r\ncurious tone all of its own. There have been movies in which the actors played\r\nstraight knowing they were in satires, and movies which were unintentionally\r\nfunny because they were so bad or camp. But the tone of "BVD" comes\r\nfrom actors directed at right angles to the material. "If the actors perform\r\nas if they know they have funny lines, it won\t work," Meyer said, and he\r\nwas right.
The\r\nmovie was inspired only incidentally by "
Valley of the Dolls
."\r\nNeither Meyer nor I ever read Jacqueline Susann\s book, but we did screen the
Mark Robson
film, and we took the same formula: Three young girls come to\r\nHollywood, find fame and fortune, are threatened by sex, violence and drugs,\r\nand either do or not do win redemption.
The\r\noriginal book was a roman a clef, and so was "BVD," with an important\r\ndifference: We wanted the movie to seem like a fictionalized expose of real\r\npeople, but we personally possessed no real information to use as inspiration\r\nfor the characters. The character of teenage rock tycoon Ronnie\r\n"Z-Man" Barzell, for example, was supposed to be "inspired"\r\nby
Phil Spector
-- but neither Meyer nor I had ever met Spector.
The\r\nmovie\s story was made up as we went along, which makes subsequent analysis a\r\nlittle tricky. Not long ago, for example, I was invited up to Syracuse\r\nUniversity to discuss Meyer\s work, and the subject of Z-Man came up. Readers\r\nwho have seen "BVD" will know that Z-Man is a rock Svengali who seems\r\nto be a gay man for most of the movie, but is finally revealed to be a woman in\r\ndrag. Some of the questions at Syracuse dealt with the "meaning" of\r\nZ-Man\s earlier scenes, in light of what is later discovered about the\r\ncharacter. But in fact those earlier scenes were written before either Meyer or\r\nI knew Z-Man was a transvestite: that plot development came on the spur of the\r\nmoment. So, too, did such inspirations as quoting a "
Citizen Kane
"\r\ncamera movement from a stage below to a catwalk above, or the use of the Fox\r\nmusical fanfare during the beheading sequence.
"They\r\nasked at Syracuse if Meyers use of the Fox trademark music was a put-down of\r\nthe studio system. Meyers motive was much more basic: By using the music, he\r\nhoped to establish a satiric tone to the scene that would moderate the effect\r\nof the beheading and help protect against an X rating."
In\r\nthe event, of course, "Beyond the Valley of the Dolls" was rated X\r\nanyway. There is a story about that. If the movie were to be rated today, it\r\nwould probably get an R rating with a few small cuts. It was a very mild X.\r\nThat was because Meyer and the studio were aiming for the R rating. When they\r\ndidn\t get it, Meyer believed the ratings board had felt obligated to give the\r\n"King of the Nudies" an X rating, lest it seem to endorse his movie\r\nto the Majors.
Because\r\nthe movie was stuck with the X, Meyer wanted to re-edit certain scenes in order\r\nto include more nudity he shot many scenes in both X and R versions. But the\r\nstudio, still in the middle of a cash-flow crisis, wanted to rush the film into\r\nrelease. Meyer still waxes nostalgic for the "real" X version of BVD,\r\nwhich exists only in his memory but includes many much steamier scenes starring\r\nthe movie\s many astonishingly beautiful heroines and villianesses.
The\r\nvisit to Syracuse was a chance for me to see BVD again for the first time in a\r\nfew years. The movie still seems to play for audiences; it hasn\t dated, apart\r\nfrom the rather old-fashioned narrative quality it had even at the time of its\r\nrelease. It begins rather slowly, because so many characters have to be\r\nestablished and such an ungainly plot has to be set in motion. The story is\r\nsuch a labyrinthine juggling act that resolving it took a quadruple murder, a\r\nnarrative summary, a triple wedding and an epilogue. But the last hour has a\r\nreal kinetic energy, and the scenes beginning with Z-Man\s psychedelic orgy and\r\nending with his death are, I must say on Meyer\s behalf, as exciting,\r\nterrifying and dynamic as any such sequence I can remember. That stretch of\r\n"BVD" is pure cinema, combining shameless melodrama, highly charged\r\nimages of violence, sledge-hammer editing and musical overkill. It works.
And\r\nthe movie as a whole? I think of it as an essay on our generic expectations.\r\nIt\s an anthology of stock situations, characters, dialogue, clichés and\r\nstereotypes, set to music and manipulated to work as exposition and satire at\r\nthe same time; it\s cause and effect, a wind-up machine to generate emotions,\r\npure movie without message. The strange thing about the movie is that it\r\ncontinues to play successfully to completely different audiences for different\r\nreasons. When Meyer and I were hired a few years later to work on an ill-fated\r\nSex Pistols movie called "Who Killed Bambi?" we were both a little nonplussed,\r\nI think, to hear Johnny Rotten explain that he liked "Beyond the Valley of\r\nthe Dolls" because it was so true to life.

The Fifth Horseman is Fear 1968 Cast
Miroslav Machacek as Dr. Braun
Olga Scheinpflugova as Music teacher
Jiri Adamira as Mr. Vesely
Illia Prachar as Butcher
Josef Vinklar as Mr. Fanta
Zdenka Prochazkova as Mrs. Vesely
Slavka Budinova as Mrs. Wlenerova
Jiri Virtala as Inspector
Directed by Zbynek Brynych
Drama, Foreign, War "The Fifth Horseman is Fear" is such a nearly perfect film that it comes as a shock, in the last ten minutes, to discover how deeply involved you have become.
In this sense, it resembles Fellini\s "
8 1/2
." The technique itself is such a pleasure to observe that the emotion steals unnoticed into the back of your mind. Then, at the end, the director pulls the strings and you realize the tragic meaning of the things you have seen.
"The Fifth Horseman" is the first film shown in this country by
Zbynek Brynych
", a 41-year-old director from Czechoslovakia. Yet it is unmistakably the work of a master, and I can only wonder whether Brynych has made other films or if his ability is natural, as Fellinis seems to be."
I mention Fellini because this film seems to have what Fellini and very few other directors are able to achieve: A sense of rhythm. It is not a series of scenes cut together, not a series of statements made one after another, but a total film, conceived as one complete idea.
The story is about an old Jewish doctor who has been forbidden by the Nazis to practice medicine. He works in a large warehouse as a clerk, cataloging confiscated Jewish property.
"At first we do not realize exactly where we are, and as the old man moves through rooms filled with clocks and violins and teacups, his existence seems almost dreamlike. But soon enough we discover that this is Prague, the city of Kafka, and that the mans life is indeed quite real."
"A wounded partisan is brought to the doctor for medical attention. He treats him, hides him and goes on a search through Prague for morphine to deaden the mans pain."
His trip is like a journey through the underworld. It takes him to a house of prostitution, to a madhouse and to a nightclub known as the Desperation Bar, where Jews have gathered to drink and listen to the piano and try to ignore the significance of the Nazis in the streets outside.
This scene in the nightclub is one of singular brilliance. Brynych uses his camera as Fellini does, moving almost in rhythm with the music, catching faces and attitudes for all time against plain white backgrounds. The use of music in this scene, and throughout the picture, is perhaps the best since "
La Dolce Vita
." There, too, the sound of a cocktail orchestra seemed inexplicably tragic.
After the old man has gotten the morphine, he goes back to his rooming house. We have already met the other tenants: a minor Nazi functionary, a wealthy lawyer, a music teacher, an eccentric.
It is difficult to describe what happens then without destroying the impact of the last minutes. But I will say that Brynych finds a subtle way to demonstrate that the roomers of that building, each in his own way, is as guilty as the Nazis for the event that takes place.
"The Fifth Horseman Is Fear" is a beautiful, distinguished work. I imagine it will win this year\s Academy Award for the best foreign film.
EDITOR\S NOTE: "The Fifth Horseman is Fear" was not nominated for an Academy Award. The entry from Czechoslovakia for best foreign film of 1967 was Jiri Menzel\s "
Closely Watched Trains
" it won; the entry for 1968 was Milos Forman\s "
"The Firemens Ball"
" it lost to the Russian "
War and Peace
".

Silent House 2012 Cast
Elizabeth Olsen as Sarah
Adam Trese as John
Eric Sheffer Stevens as Uncle Peter
Julia Taylor Ross as Sophia
Adam Barnett as Stalking Man
Directed by Chris Kentis
Laura Lau Written by
Lau Horror, Mystery, Thriller
Rated R for disturbing violent content and terror
85 minutes "Silent House" is another one of those Scream at the Screen movies, in which you want to shout out advice to a character. In this case, a nubile young woman is trapped inside an apparently haunted house for most of the time, and what you want to shout is,
Get out of the damn house!
Finally, a little beyond the halfway mark, she does escape, running out the front door and flees, weeping and stumbling, down a country road until her Uncle Peter drives along, and they return to the house and she goes back inside.
Soon she\s reduced to tiptoeing through the darkness calling out "Uncle Peter?" when not long before she was calling "Dad? Daddy?" This is an optimistic girl. Her name is Sarah, and she\s played by
Elizabeth Olsen
, the younger sister of Mary-Kate and Ashley. We saw her not long ago in the challenging lead role of "
Martha Marcy May Marlene
." In that film, she demonstrated she\s a gifted actress, and in "Silent House," she performs a rite of passage for many young actresses, as the endangered heroine of a horror film.
I said the house is "apparently" haunted because … well, you\ll see. It\s nothing as simple as that. The movie is a remake of a horror film from Uruguay, and both the original and the remake claim to have been shot in a single take. I doubt it. If it is, it\s the most amazing single take since "
Russian Ark
," beginning with an overhead crane shot on a lake shore and then traveling down a road and into a house and following the heroine upstairs and downstairs and into the basement. That would take one hell of a cameraman, and there are all kinds of shots where the screen goes dark and cuts could obviously be concealed.
"Whatever. The camera remains always close to Sarah, sometimes almost resting on her shoulder, and whats impressive is Olsens ability to sustain that kind of intense on-cam scrutiny and stay convincingly in character. She has a pretty face, expressive and delicate, and carefully modulates her performance: not overacting, not mugging, not trying to sell us on anything. Some of her best moments communicate silent terror."
The "Silent House" is her family\s summer home, quite large, three floors, with a seemingly unlimited number of doors located at right angles to other doors, so that in another world, this would be a good location for a slapstick farce. There\s also an unreasonably high number of closet doors and doors opening into staircases.
Sarah, dad John 
Adam Trese
 and Uncle Peter 
Eric Sheffer Stevens
" enter the house. Its daylight, but window boards make it pitch black inside. They carry bright lamps. Left alone, she begins to hear things. Tappings, squeakings, scuttlings, breathings, creakings, moanings, clickings. This house embodies a full rhythm section."
Creeping through the dark, she finds her dad again, and then Uncle Peter leaves for a while and things get really heavy. The secret of the plot is revealed to be unexpectedly fraught, and a surrealistic element enters with bodies in bathtubs and a toilet mounted vertically on a wall and dripping a stream of blood.
"My attention was held for the first act or so. Then any attempt at realism was abandoned, and it became clear that the house, and the movie containing it, were devices to manufacture methodical thrills. The explanation, if thats what it was, seemed contrived and unconvincing. To some degree, the ending of a film should seem vaguely necessary, dont you think?"
Truth in reviewing: I saw the film with a sneak preview audience. Most of my fellow audience members sat quietly, but there was a cadre of girlfriends three rows down and on the right who shrieked on cue and then laughed — which is proper, because that\s why people go to these thrillers, to be amused that they were frightened. If that\s the case with you, "Silent House" delivers, although you may be left suspecting there\s more to the mold in the walls than they\re telling us.

The Filth and the Fury 2000 Directed and Photographed by
Julien Temple Documentary, Foreign, Music
Rated R For Pervasive Strong Language, Drugs and Sexual Content
105 minutes The saga of the Sex Pistols is told for the third time in "The Filth and the Fury." Not bad for a band that symbolized punk rock but lasted less than two years, fought constantly, insulted the press, spit on their fans, were banned from TV, were fired by one record company 24 hours after being signed, released only one album, pushed safety pins through noses and ear lobes to more or less invent body piercing, broke up during a tour of the United States, and saw front man Sid Vicious accused of murdering his girlfriend and dying of a drug overdose.
Director
Julien Temple
based his "Great Rock and Roll Swindle" 1980 on a version of the Pistols story supplied by Malcolm McLaren, their infamously self-promoting manager, and now, 20 years later, Temple tells the story through the eyes and in the words of the band members themselves. In between came Alex Cox\s "Sid & Nancy" 1986, with Gary Oldman\s shattering performance as the self-destructive Sid Vicious.
It wasn\t what the band stood for. It was what they stood against. "Attack, attack, attack," says lead singer Johnny Rotten in the film. Now once again John Lydon, he appears along with guitarist Steve Jones, drummer Paul Cook, McLaren, original band member Glen Matlock deposed by Vicious and even Vicious himself, in an interview filmed a year before his death. The surviving members are backlit so we cannot see their faces, which would have provided a middle-aged contrast to the savage young men on the screen; McLaren talks from behind a rubber bondage mask like those he and onetime girlfriend Vivienne Westwood sold in their boutique Sex.
McLaren claimed the Sex Pistols were entirely his invention and painted himself as a puppetmaster. Lydon, who calls him the Manager throughout the film, says, "There was never a relationship between the Manager and me except he stole my ideas and used them as his own." The truth probably resides in between.
I had a glimpse of the Sex Pistols in 1977, when McLaren hired
Russ Meyer
to direct them in a movie, and Meyer hired me to write it McLaren and Rotten were fans of our "
Beyond the Valley of the Dolls
". I wrote a screenplay in Los Angeles with McLaren feeding me background and ideas. Then Meyer and I flew to London to meet with Rotten, Vicious, Cook and Jones. Meyer, wary of McLaren\s trademark bondage pants, insisted on sitting on the aisle: "If we have to evacuate, he\ll get those goddamned straps tangled up in the seats." I remember a surrealistic dinner involving Rotten, Meyer and me "We won the Battle of Britain for you," Meyer sternly lectured Rotten, while I mused that America was not involved in the Battle of Britain and Rotten was Irish. Rotten seemed amused by the fact that Meyer was unintimidated by his fearsomely safety-pinned facade. As we drove him home, he complained bitterly that McLaren had the band on a salary of eight pounds a week, borrowed five pounds from Meyer and had us stop at an all-night store so he could buy a six-pack of lager and cans of pork and beans.
The truth is, no one made much money off the Pistols, although McLaren made the most. The plug was pulled on our film, "Who Killed Bambi?," after a day and a half of shooting, when the electricians walked off the set after McLaren couldn\t pay them. Meyer had presciently demanded his own weekly pay in advance every Monday morning.
"The Catch-22 with punk rock, and indeed with all forms of entertainment designed to shock and offend the bourgeoisie, is that if your act is too convincing, you put yourself out of business, a fact carefully noted by todays rappers as they go as far as they can without going too far."
The Sex Pistols went too far. They never had a period that could be described as actual success. Even touring England at the height of their fame, they were booked into clubs under false names. They were hated by the establishment, shut down by the police and pilloried by the press "The Filth and the Fury" takes its title from a banner headline that once occupied a full front page of the Daily Mirror. That was bad enough. Worse was that their own fans sometimes attacked them, lashed into a frenzy by the front line of Rotten and Vicious, who were sometimes performers, sometimes bear-baiters.
Rotten was the victim of a razor attack while walking the streets of London; McLaren not only failed to provide security, he wouldn\t pay taxi fares. Vicious was his own worst enemy, and if there was one thing that united the other three band members and McLaren, it was hatred for Sid\s girlfriend, Nancy Spungen, who they felt was instrumental in his drug addiction. "Poor sod," today\s John Lydon says of his dead bandmate.
To see this film\s footage from the \70s is to see the beginning of much of pop and fashion iconography for the next two decades. After the premiere of "The Filth and the Fury" at Sundance, I ran into Temple, who observed, "In the scenes where they\re being interviewed on television, they look normal. It\s the interviewers who look like freaks." Normal, no. But in torn black T-shirts and punk haircuts, they look contemporary, unlike the dated, polyestered, wide-lapeled and blow-dried creatures interviewing them.
"England survived the Sex Pistols, and they mostly survived England, although Lydon still feels it is unsafe for him to return there. He now has an interview program on VH-1 and the Web. Cook and Jones lead settled lives. McLaren still has bright ideas. Vivienne Westwood has emerged as one of Britains most successful designers, and poses for photographs in which she bears a perfect resemblance to Mrs. Thatcher. And as for Sid, my notes from the movie say that while the Pistols were signing a record deal in front of Buckingham Palace and insulting the queen, Sids father was a Grenadier Guard on duty in front of the palace. Surely I heard that wrong?"

Sprung 1997 Cast
Tisha Campbell as Brandy
Rusty Cundieff as Montel
Paula Jai Parker as Adina
Joe Torry as Clyde
Clarence Williams III as Grand Daddy
Directed by Rusty Cundieff
Produced by Darin Scott
Written by Cundieff
Scott Comedy, Romance
Rated R For Some Strong Sexuality and Language
105 minutes Sometimes it takes one movie to show you how good another movie was. "Sprung\\ provides that service for "Booty Call"\xa0Both movies are sexcoms about two black couples. Both are cheerfully vulgar. Both have lots of sex and slapstick. "Booty Call"\xa0works. "Sprung,\\ despite its focus on a sweet relationship, doesn\t.
The film begins with a man-hunting woman named Adina 
Paula Jai Parker
 who convinces her somewhat shy friend Brandy 
Tisha Campbell
", a law clerk, to go partying. And at one party, Adina exhibits her laser-like ability to calculate a mans worth by running an inventory on what hes wearing, while mental cash registers ring. Shes fooled, though, by Clyde "
Joe Torry
, manager of a fast food store, who flashes the key ring of a borrowed Porsche and "drops\\ a phony bank receipt.
"When Adina and Clyde pair off, that leaves Brandy with Clydes friend Montel "
Rusty Cundieff
", the films director and co-writer. Cut to Clydes apartment, where in the movies worst miscalculation, he and Adina make love in a disturbingly animalistic scene that runs on and on and on to the worlds loudest simultaneous orgasm--surpassing any possible comic purpose and simply becoming porno without the closeups."
"That scene throws the whole opening of the movie out of whack: In effect and length, it disturbs the tone, and its a long time before we realize it had nothing to do with the rest of the plot. The other couple, Montel and Brandy, fall in love, and theyre charming with each other--it would be a nice story if it werent always being interrupted. But that happens regularly; Adina and Clyde plot to trick their friends to break up. Why? Because otherwise the couples always will be double-dating, and Adina and Clyde will have to spend too much time together with them."
"Dont worry if you dont follow this. It has no connection to human life and exists only in the terms of screenplay cliches. All that redeems it is the characters of Montel and Brandy; we care about them even though the movie does little to help us. There are well-written scenes in which Brandy, whos studying to be a lawyer, has to get over her snobbery and realize that Montel may indeed have a future in fast food."
"Unfortunately, the movies good vibes are undermined by the dialogue, which makes a running gag out of the ability to put together long, ugly sentences full of insulting epitaphs--"
"pimp\\ and "buckwheat\\ are two I can print here. Why are there so many racial insults in black-oriented movies; isn\t it time to declare a moratorium on insulting language? Thinking back over the film, I can see how it might have been better. The plot might have worked if the characters had been allowed to emerge as halfway convincing people. Instead, there\s a hyper quality to "Sprung,\\ as if Cundieff was concerned that a moment\s pause or silence would sink the picture. It\s amusing when he uses special effects stars spin around Clyde\s head, and Adina\s inventory scene has cute visuals. But desperation created the sequence where Clyde plots to get Montel drunk and seduced by an old flame; Brandy\s heart is broken when she overhears what she thinks are the sounds of love.
There is a nice extended sequence Brandy and Montel first meet for lunch in the park. They like each other, they eat an obligatory hot dog, they talk and walk, and then, that evening, they happen upon a ballroom dancing party of middle-aged African-Americans, and spin onto the dance floor. Afterward they walk in the moonlight--and the next morning they\re *still* in the park! It\s like getting "Before Sunrise\\ as a bonus in the middle of a different movie.

An Angel at My Table 1991 Cast
Kerry Fox as Janet
Alexia Keogh as Young Janet
Karen Fergusson as Teenage Janet
Iris Churn as Mum
K.J. Wilson as Dad
Directed by Jane Campion
Produced by Bridget Ikin
Photographed by Stuart Dryburgh
Written by Laura Jones
Edited by Veronika Haussler
Drama, Foreign Rated R
160 minutes "Here is the story of a curly-haired little redhead who grew up to be one of New Zealands best authors, after enduring ordeals that would have put most people into a madhouse. The irony is that she was already in the madhouse, misdiagnosed as a schizophrenic, and subjected to more than 200 electroshock treatments even though there was nothing really wrong with her except for shyness and depression."
Janet Frame is today the author of some 20 novels, books of poetry, plays and autobiographies. The first two books were actually written and published while she was in a mental hospital, and it is possible to wonder if the act of writing them saved her life - giving her a place to order her thoughts in the middle of chaos.
Jane Campion\s "An Angel at My Table" tells her story in a way that I found strangely engrossing from beginning to end. This is not a hyped-up biopic or a soap opera, but simply the record of a life as lived, beginning in childhood with a talented, dreamy girl whose working-class parents loved her, and continuing to follow her as she was gradually shunted by society into a place that almost killed her. Janet is played in the film by three different actresses from girlhood through her 20s into her 30s, they are
Kerry Fox
,
Alexia Keogh
and
Karen Fergusson
, who have uncanny physical and personality similarities, and so we get a real sense of a life as it unfolds, as things go wrong and a strong spirit struggles to prevail.
"The movie opens in prewar New Zealand, a green and comfortable land where Janets father works for the railroad and she fits comfortably into a family including a brother and two sisters that she adores. She is a funny-looking child, with bad teeth and a mop of unruly scarlet hair, but there is something special about her."
"She has a poets imagination, and when she writes a poem for grade school, she is absolutely sure what words she wishes to use, and cannot be persuaded by authority to change one word."
"She grows up slowly, doesnt date, doesnt have much of a social life. In school, she socializes with the outcasts - the brains, the non-conformists, the arty set - but looks with envy on the popular girls and their boyfriends. It is a world she does not hope to understand. In college, too, shes a loner, shy, keeping to herself, confiding everything to a journal, and then, in her first job as a schoolteacher, she does not join the other teachers for tea because she cannot think of what to say to them. One day the school inspector comes to visit her class, and she freezes up and cannot say anything."
She is essentially having a panic attack, but one officious and ignorant diagnosis leads to another and she is committed to a mental home, beginning eight years of unspeakable horror as she is given shock treatments and even threatened with a lobotomy by professionals whose complete ignorance of her condition does not inhibit their cheerful eagerness to deprive her of mind and freedom.
Her books help her keep her mind, and eventually help her win her release - her father, cowed by the professionals, vows he will never let her go back to the asylum again - and at last, in her 30s, her true life begins as she gets a grant to study abroad and falls in with a group of bohemian writers and painters in Spain. She even finally loses her virginity, and although she will always be a little odd, a loner, wrapped in a cocoon of privacy, we can see her gradually becoming more comfortable with life.
Campion, who directed from a screenplay by
Laura Jones
, is the author of last year\s "
Sweetie
," a movie about a family almost destroyed by a disruptive sister. That was a film I had to struggle with. I did not relate to it on the first viewing, but I could sense that something was there, and eventually, after two more viewings, I came to love it. "An Angel at My Table" does not require a struggle: It is told with a clarity and simplicity that is quietly but completely absorbing. Yes, it is visually beautiful, and, yes, it is well-acted, but it doesn\t call attention to its qualities. It tells its story calmly and with great attention to human detail and, watching it, I found myself drawn in with a rare intensity.

Sid and Nancy 1986 Drama, Foreign, Music, Romance
Rated R 112 minutes
"His real name was John Simon Ritchie, and his father was a trombone player who left before he was born. His mother wore her hair long and went to all the hippie festivals with the little boy at her side. They lived in Londons East End, within the culture of poverty and drugs. When he was fifteen, Ritchie dropped out of school. When he was seventeen, he was one of the most famous people in England, although by then he was known as Sid Vicious of the notorious Sex Pistols."
What did he respond to when the American girl, Nancy Spungen, came into his life? She was a groupie from New York, but she was also an authority figure who pushed him to try harder, complained when he was not given his due, and plotted to get him better deals and wider exposure. If she had not bled to death that night in New York, she might have made Vicious really amount to something, someday.
The astonishing thing about "Sid and Nancy" is the amount of subtle information it gives us about their relationship, given the fact that the surface of the movie is all tumult and violence, pain and confusion. This movie doesn\t take the easy way out and cast these two lovers as Romeo and Juliet, misunderstood waifs. It sees beneath their leather and chains, their torn T-shirts and steel-toed boots, to a basically conventional relationship between an ambitious woman and a man who was still a boy.
They needed each other. Spungen needed someone to mother, and Vicious, according to his friends, needed self-esteem and was immensely proud that he had an American girlfriend. They were meant for each other, but by the end it was all just ashes and bewilderment, because they were so strung out on drugs that whole days would slip by unnoticed. In their fantasies of doomed romance, they planned to go out together in a suicide pact, but by the end they were too sick to even go out together for a pizza.
"By now, everybody knows that Vicious woke up one morning in New Yorks Chelsea Hotel to find Spungeons dead body. He was booked on suspicion of murder, released on bail, and two months later was dead of a drug overdose. The available evidence strongly suggests that he did not stab Spungeon to death, but that she died of one of those untidy accidents that befall drug abusers. A human being is a dangerous thing to let loose in a room with itself, when it cannot think."
There were some good times earlier in their story, but on the evidence of this movie there were not many. By the time Spungeon met Vicious in London in the mid-1970s, the Sex Pistols were the most infamous punk rock band in the world. But they were in the position of Gandhi in that apocryphal story where he sees the mob run past and races to get in front of his followers. The punk conceit was a total rejection of conventional society; their credo was the line by Johnny Rotten, the Pistols\ lead singer: "Got a problem and the problem is you." For the Pistols to stay in front of that mob, they had to be meaner, more violent, more negative than their followers. How did it feel to stand on a bandstand and make angry music while your fans stood face to face, banging heads until unconsciousness came?
"Sid and Nancy" suggests that Vicious never lived long enough to really get his feet on the ground, to figure out where he stood and where his center was. He was handed great fame and a certain amount of power and money, and indirectly told that his success depended on staying fucked up. This is a big assignment for a kid who would otherwise be unemployable. Vicious did his best, fighting and vomiting and kicking his way through his brief days and long nights, until Spungen brought him a measure of relief. Some nights she was someone to hold, and other nights she was someone to hold onto. What difference did it make?
"Sid and Nancy" makes these observations with such complexity, such vividness, and such tenderness that at the end of the film a curious thing happens. You do not weep for Vicious, or Spungen, but maybe you weep for all of us, that we have been placed in a world where it is possible for people to make themselves so unhappy. Vicious was not a hero, just a guy who got himself into a situation he couldn\t handle. But to thousands of London kids, he represented an affront to a society that offered no jobs, no training, no education, and no entry into the world of opportunity. If life offers you nothing, the least you can offer it is the finger.
Performances like the ones in this film go beyond movie acting and into some kind of evocation of real lives. Vicious is played by
Gary Oldman
and Spungen is played by
Chloe Webb
", and there isnt even a brief period at the top of the movie where we have to get used to them. They are these people, driven and relentless."
The movie was directed by
Alex Cox
, who made "
Repo Man
" a couple of years ago, and here he announces himself as a great director. He and his actors pull off the neat trick of creating a movie full of noise and fury, and telling a meticulous story right in the middle of it.
"But why should anyone care about a movie about two scabrous vulgarians? Because the subject of a really good movie is sometimes not that important. Its the acting, writing, and direction that count. If a movie can illuminate the lives of other people who share this planet with us and show us not only how different they are but, how even so, they share the same dreams and hurts, then it deserves to be called great. If you have an open mind, it is possibly true that the less you care about Sid Vicious, the more you will admire this movie."

The Visit 2001 Cast
Hill Harper as Alex
Obba Babatunde as Tony
Rae Dawn Chong as Felicia
Billy Dee Williams as Henry
Marla Gibbs as Lois
Phylicia Rashad as Dr. Coles
Written and Directed by Jordan Walker-Pearlman
Based On The Play by Kosmond Russell
Drama Rated R
For Language and Some Drug Content 107 minutes
"The Visit" tells the story of a 32-year-old prison inmate, up for parole, dying of AIDS, trying to come to terms with his past. In a series of prison visits with his parents, his brother, a prison psychiatrist and a woman who was his childhood friend, he moves slowly from anger to acceptance--he becomes a better person.
This outline sounds perhaps too pious to be absorbing, and the final scenes lay on the message a little thick. But "The Visit" contains some effective performances, not least from
Hill Harper
as Alex, the hero. I remembered him from "
Loving Jezebel
" and from a supporting role in "
He Got Game
," but wasn\t prepared for the depth here; this is a performance announcing that Harper is to be taken seriously. Another surprise comes from
Billy Dee Williams
; we think of him as a traditional leading man, but here he is as a proud, angry, unyielding father--an authority figure who takes it as a personal affront that his son has gone wrong.
"But has he gone wrong? Alex is doing 25 years for a rape he says he didnt commit. His mother "
Marla Gibbs
" believes him. His father remembers that Alex stole from them, lied to them, was a junkie and a thief, and thinks him capable of anything. Alexs brother Tony "
Obba Babatunde
", well-dressed, successful, mirrors the fathers attitudes; it diminishes them to have a prisoner in the family."
"The movie doesnt crank up the volume with violence and jailhouse cliches, but focuses on this person and his possibilities for change. The key law enforcement officials are not sadistic guards or authoritarian wardens, but people who listen."
Phylicia Rashad
plays the psychiatrist, trying to lead him past denial into acceptance, and there are several scenes involving a parole board that are driven by insight, not the requirements of the drama. The board members, led by
Talia Shire
, discuss his case, express their doubts, get mad at one another, seem real.
Rae Dawn Chong
"plays Felicia, the old friend, who has her own demons. A former addict and a prostitute, she killed an abusive father, but now has her life together and visits Alex at the urging of Tony its perceptive of the movie to notice how reluctant family members often recruit volunteers to do their emotional heavy-lifting. Her story and other conversations trigger flashbacks and fantasies in a story that has enormous empathy for this man at the end of a lost life. The screenplay by director"
Jordan Walker-Pearlman
is from a play by
Kosmond Russell
, based on his relationship with a brother in prison. Watching the movie, I was reminded of a powerful moment in "
The Shawshank Redemption
," when the
Morgan Freeman
character, paroled as an old man, is asked if he has reformed. He says such words have no meaning. He is no longer the same person who committed the crime. He would give anything, he says, to grab that young punk he once was and shake some sense into him. "The Visit" is about the same process--the fact that the prisoner we see is not the same person who was convicted. If, that is, he is lucky enough to grow and change. The last act of "The Visit" hurries that process too much, but the journey is worth taking.

Miss Minoes 2011 Cast
Carice van Houten as Minoes
Theo Maassen as Tibbe
Sarah Bannier as Bibi
Pierre Bokma as Meneer Ellemeet
Hans Kesting as Harrie
Directed by Vincent Bal
Written by Tamara Bos
Based on the novel by Annie M.G. Schmidt
Comedy, Family, Fantasy, Foreign, Science Fiction Rated PG
for brief language, smoking and rude behavior 86 minutes
"Miss Minoes" is a film I suspect would be adored by young girls who love cats. I am not that young woman. It\s nominally a children\s film, based on a children\s book, but in its native Holland, it won awards for both best film and best actress. Best film I don\t understand. Best actress — well, the role is certainly challenging.
"The Miss Minoes of the title begins life as a Siamese cat. After exposure to a barrel filled with chemicals that falls off a passing truck, Minoes turns into a woman Carice van Houten who speaks, dresses and moves like a human but also climbs into trees when chased by dogs and eats sardines without using her fingers. The movie doesnt look into her response to a litter box."
Tibbe 
Theo Maassen
, a local newspaper reporter, meets Miss Minoes one night when she is crawling on the roof outside his window. The movie sidesteps any romantic implications in their encounter and uses Minoes as a news source for the young reporter, who is shy and not very good at his job.
"If anyone knows everything thats going on in town, it is a cat, and Minoes is wired into the local feline hot\xadline. She begins to produce a series of scoops that moves Tibbe into the top ranks of his paper and eventually lead to an expose about the nefarious schemes of a local villain who runs an animal welfare organization as his cover."
"The cats all speak. If their lips were synched in the original Dutch, well never know, because the movie has been dubbed into English — just as well for younger audiences. It is also kid-friendly in its simplicity and a bit too simpleminded for me. I was frustrated that it avoids countless logical questions. For example, after Miss Minoes changes into a cat, she is fully clothed. Shouldnt she be nude?"
"Still, the movie is probably ideal for those proverbial young girls who adore cats, and young boys, too. I cant recommend it for adults attending on their own, unless they really, really love cats."

Firewalker 1986 Cast
Chuck Norris as Max Donigan
Lou Gossett as Leo Porter
Melody Anderson as Patricia Goodwyn
Will Sampson as Tall Eagle
Sonny Landham as El Coyote
John Rhys-Davies as Corky Taylor
Ian Abercrombie as Boggs
Zaide S. Gutierrez as Indian Girl
Directed by J. Lee Thompson
Produced by Menahem Golan
Yorum Globus Screenplay by
Robert Gosnell Photographed by
Alex Phillips Edited by
Richard Marx Music by
Gary Chang Action, Adventure, Comedy
Rated PG-13 107 minutes
Where to start with this movie? Where to end? Even more to the point, in which order to show the reels? "Firewalker" is a free-form anthology of familiar images from the works of
Steven Spielberg
, subjected to a new process that we could call discolorization. All of the style and magic are gone, leaving only the booby-trapped temples, the steaming jungle and such lines as, if I remember correctly, "Witch, woman, harlot - I\ve been called them all!" "Firewalker" borrows its closing images from the Indiana Jones movies, but its press notes optimistically claim the movie is "in the tradition" of "
Romancing the Stone
." In literature, it\s called plagiarism. In the movies, it\s homage. The movie stars
Chuck Norris
,
Lou Gossett
and
Melody Anderson
"in a romp through Central America in search of a lost temple filled with gold. Norris and Gossett are professional adventurers and best pals; Anderson is a rich girl who walks into a bar and asks for two men who are strong, brave and not too smart. Shes got an old treasure map and wants them to help her find the gold."
"We know Norris and Gossett are just the guys shes looking for, because we were observing closely during the title sequence, when they were not too smart. The two men are staked face-up in the desert and left to die. And as a special torture, Norris is given a full bottle of Perrier to hold in his right hand, so that water will be tantalizingly close as the hot sun bakes him. Norris breaks the bottle and uses a shard of glass to cut the rope, which is terrific, except that we can clearly see that all either one of them has to do is simply slip the rope off the top of the stake."
"Once theyre in the jungle with Anderson, the movie turns into one of those blood-soaked travelogues in which enemies pop up like targets in a shooting gallery. The bad guys include mercenary soldiers, Indians, rebel troops, crazed would-be dictators and a man who is named Cyclops because he wears a patch over one eye."
"Cyclops was my inspiration to play the game of Continuity with this movie. Thats the game where you count all the mistakes, such as that his patch is over his right eye the first time we see him and his left eye the other times. Also, Norris and Anderson are in a VW bug that sinks while fording a river. Its two feet from shore, but when they escape from it, they have to swim at least 25 yards. Later, they find Gossett suspended above a pool of boiling water by a rope tied around his hands. Norris leaps out to embrace Gossett, and they swing back and forth until the rope frays and allows them to land on a ledge, where Gossetts hands are miraculously free."
Continuity is a game you play only during a movie that gives you little else to think about. Although Norris and Gossett are capable of far better things, nothing in this movie gives that away. They never really seem to feel anything. For example, Gossett disappears, apparently eaten by an alligator, and the most Norris can work up is a case of vexation. Anderson seems to be in the movie mostly so that Norris has someone to drag out of danger.
There are, of course, the obligatory karate fights, in which Norris flies through the air and aims his magic heels at the villains, killing or disabling dozens of them. Karate scenes always inspire the same question: Why doesn\t somebody just shoot the guy dead while he\s whirling around? "Firewalker" was directed by J. Lee Thompson, whose credits include "The Guns of Navarone." He has recently labored in the Cannon stable, turning out weary action retreads such as the
Richard Chamberlain
version of "King Solomon\s Mines." This time he has directed by rote, failing his actors by letting them appear blase in the moments when they should be excited, and, even worse, excited when they should be blase. This effectively short-circuits all the potential moments of humor. For example, Gossett is more excited at the sight of the treasure map than he is at the sight of the treasure.
"On second thought, maybe Gossett simply got a good look at the treasure. The temple contains a room roughly as big as Citizen Kanes warehouse filled with gold objects. Once or twice, the camera strayed too close, and I was able to see that some of the priceless treasures of the ancients included spray-painted Tupperware."
Consumer note: Nobody walks on fire in this movie.

The Jerk 1979 Comedy
Rated R 94 minutes
Reviewing a comedy can be a tricky business, because the question of whether the comedy was "good" or "bad" depends almost entirely upon whether or not the reviewer was amused. Laughter is quite often an involuntary reaction: If I laugh at something and you don\t, no amount of my logic is going to convince you that it was funny.
And so when I say that “The Jerk,” the first major film starring
Steve Martin
, was not an amusing comedy, I should probably also report that a lot of the people who went to the sneak preview laughed all the way through it. Others booed—but there you are.
"I can report, however, why I didnt find “The Jerk” very funny. It began to grind on me right at the beginning because it was depending on whats rather than whys for its laughs. Ill explain. It seems to me that there are two basic approaches to any kind of comedy, and in a burst of oversimplification Ill call them the Funny Hat and the Funny Logic approaches. The difference is elementary: In the first, were supposed to laugh because the comic is wearing the funny hat, and in the second its funny because of his reasons for wearing the funny hat."
"You may have guessed by now that I prefer the Funny Logic approach, and that “The Jerk” is almost entirely a movie of Funny Hats. An example, from the films opening premise: Steve Martin has been raised as a member of a family of poor black Southern sharecroppers, and, although he is white, it has never occurred to him that he might be adopted. His life is happy until the day he learns the truth, and is sent out into the world to earn his way. He hits the road wearing a World War II bombers helmet and goggles."
"OK. “The Jerk” wants us to laugh at this material just at the most basic level. Martin is white and thinks the blacks are his parents, ha, ha. He wears a funny hat when he hits the road, ho, ho. Those are the whats. What about the whys? Why is he wearing the goggles? So we will laugh. Theres no plot point to be made, and nothing is being said about his character—except, of course, that hes a jerk."
By way of comparison, Mel Brooks\ "
The Producers
" 1968 opens in the office of theatrical producer
Zero Mostel
", who is deeply involved in the inflamed sexual fantasies of a little old lady he hopes will invest in one of his plays. The old lady wants to pretend shes a helpless little milkmaid, and that Mostel is a brawny stable lad who is about to ravish her. They both look absurd while theyre playing their roles, of course, and thats the what. But the why—the reasons why Mostel feels he must behave in this ridiculous way, and keep a straight face while hes doing it makes the scene hilarious. The twisted logic beneath the surface—the cockamamie human motives we can identify with—make it comedy instead of a gag."
“The Jerk” is all gags and very little comedy. After Martin hits the road, he has a series of adventures as a gas pump jockey, a weight-guesser in a sideshow, a hapless lover of
Bernadette Peters
", an inventor of a gadget to keep your eyeglasses from falling down. All of these gag situations are milked for one-time laughs. They dont grow out of his character, or contribute to it."
"We laugh at the eyeglass invention because it looks funny when people wear it; its symbolically a Funny Hat, ho, ho. But nothing is done with it on a character level. And “The Jerk” eventually becomes aggressive and almost hostile in the way it lobs one Funny Hat after another at us: We get the sense at times that the cast and crew arrived at a location, found the script bankrupt of real laughs, and started looking around for funny props."
"Theres another sense in which “The Jerk” made me uncomfortable. Theres a smarmy undercurrent in this movie that seems to imply that Steve Martin may be playing a jerk, but that we all know what a cool guy he is. Well, if youre going to play a jerk, play one as if you think you are one, or you might wind up looking like a jerk."

The Chosen 1982 Cast
Maximilian Schell as Professor Matter
Rod Steiger as Rabbi Saunders
Robby Benson as Danny
Barry Miller as Reuven
Drama Rated PG
105 minutes "The Chosen" retells one of the most dependable\r\nstories in literature, the story in which two people from different backgrounds\r\novercome their mistrust and learn to accept each other\s traditions. These\r\nstories usually work best when the audience is in sympathy with both sets of\r\ntraditions; this is not the right time, for example, for a movie about a Moonie\r\nlearning to get along with a follower of the Ayatollah Khomeini. In "The\r\nChosen," one of the heroes is the son of a progressive Jewish\r\nintellectual, and the other is the son of a Hasidic rabbi.
from countless other movies as one of fedoras, brown overcoats\r\nand big black cars with wide running boards. The movie opens on a playground,\r\nwhere one of the kids connects with a baseball that hits the other kid in the\r\neye, temporarily blinding him. The first kid, the son of the scholar, visits\r\nthe second kid at his home and enters a world of ancient traditions and rigid\r\ndiscipline.
The\r\nrest of the movie develops this story of two different worlds, against a\r\nbackdrop of World War II and the formation of the state of Israel. Reuven\r\n
Barry Miller
 is the son of the intellectual 
Maximilian Schell
, who is\r\ninvolved in Zionism and the formation of a Jewish state. Danny 
Robby Benson
\r\nis the son of the rabbi 
Rod Steiger
, who prefers that his son stay out of\r\npolitics and, indeed, stay as much as possible out of the modern world.
Now\r\nthis is, I suppose, a promising situation, and enough people found it\r\ninteresting to make Chaim Potok\s 1967 novel, which inspired this movie, a best\r\nseller. But "The Chosen" never came alive for me. I respected what\r\nthe filmmakers were trying to do, and I admired the ambitious period\r\nproduction, but I never really cared about these people. Apparently I\m not\r\nalone After playing in hundreds of theaters as a one-night benefit for Israel\r\nin 1980, this movie has been in search of a distributor ever since.
Part\r\nof the trouble with the film is a certain lack of spontaneity in the lives of\r\nthe characters. I never had the feeling that any of them had much of a chance\r\nof surprising me. Everything they did was locked so firmly into the\r\nrequirements of the plot that even the crises seemed predictable. At about the\r\nhalfway point, for example, nobody was on speaking terms with anyone else, but\r\nby the homestretch, there was an inevitable reconciliation and a triumph for\r\nhuman understanding. Yawn.
"Im\r\nnever quite sure what this genre is trying to prove. What does it say when\r\npeople from radically different backgrounds learn to respect and love one\r\nanother? That the backgrounds are interchangeable? That ones own beliefs\r\narent as important as a kind of amorphous ecumenism in which were all\r\nbrothers? The problem is, in the real world, people generally dont get that\r\nwishy-washy about the things that concern them."
Nor\r\nshould they, perhaps. Maybe that\s what\s disappointing about "The Chosen":\r\nIt seems to argue that beliefs are interchangeable in the face of human\r\nuniversality, when in fact our beliefs are what make us human, and the knack is\r\nto respect the other person\s differences, not pretend they don\t really\r\nmatter.

Snow Falling On Cedars 2000 Cast
Ethan Hawke as Ishmael Chambers
Youki Kudoh as Hatsue Miyamoto
Rick Yune as Kazuo Miyamoto
Max von Sydow as Nels Gudmundsson
James Rebhorn as Alvin Hooks
Directed by Scott Hicks
Written by Ron Bass
Hicks Based On The Novel by
David Guterson Drama, Romance
Rated PG-13 For Disturbing War Images, Sensuality and Brief Strong Language
130 minutes "Snow Falling on Cedars" is a rich, multilayered film about a high school romance and a murder trial a decade later. The young lovers are Ishmael Chambers 
Ethan Hawke
, son of the local newspaper editor in a small Pacific Northwest town, and Hatsue Miyamoto 
Youki Kudoh
", daughter of Japanese Americans. They meet at the time of Pearl Harbor, when feeling runs high against local Asians. Ishmaels father "
Sam Shepard
 runs editorials thundering, "these people are our neighbors," but then the U.S. government seizes their property and trucks them off to internment camps in a shameful chapter of American history. Nine years later, Ishmael is a reporter at the paper, covering a murder trial. The defendant is the man Hatsue married in the camp.
Told this way, the story seems like crime and romance, but "Snow Falling on Cedars" reveals itself with the complexity of a novel, holding its themes up to the light so that first one and then another aspect can be seen. The style is crucial to the subject. The story unfolds in flashbacks, overlapping dialogue, half-understood events, flashes of memory, all seen in a variety of visual styles: Color, desaturated color, black and white, even a little grainy 16 mm. The look and sound of the film are not just easy flashiness, but match the story, which depends on the many different ways that the same events can be seen.
Above all there is a sense of place. Director
Scott Hicks
and his cinematographer,
Robert Richardson
, use a wide-screen canvas to envelop the story in trees and snow, rain and lowering skies, wetness and shadows. Rarely has a place been so evoked as part of a narrative. We sense that these people are neighbors partly because the forests crowd them together.
"In this community the Japanese Americans work as fishermen and shepherds, farmers and small-business holders, and their teenagers dance to the same pop tunes as everybody else. Yes, the races keep to themselves: Ishmaels mother disapproves of her sons friendship with Hatsue, whose own mother warns her against white boys. But boys with girls in love will fall, as e.e. cummings so simply put it, and Ishmael and Hatsue have a hidey-hole, a green cavern in the roots of a big cedar tree, where they meet to feel happy with one another. He asks her to marry him, and perhaps, if it had not been for the overwhelming fact of the war, this would have been a high school romance with a happy ending."
It is not, and in 1950, Ishmael covers a trial at which Kazuo Miyamoto 
Rick Yune
 is tried for the murder of a local fisherman whose body was found in some nets. He seems to have been bashed with a fishhook. There was bad blood between Kazuo and the victim; they fought a week before the death, and there is old bitterness involving the title to some land that was confiscated during the internment. The courtroom scenes pit a duty-bound prosecutor 
James Rebhorn
 against a tall, Lincolnesque defense attorney Max Von Sydow, foreign-born, but American to the core.
"The movie slowly reveals its connections and motivations, which take on greater importance because the trial may result in all the relationships shifting again. If the husband is guilty, perhaps the teenage lovers can be reunited. Ishmael wants that, but does Hatsue? His resentment at being rejected even colors his coverage of the trial and his thinking about the accused man. We know Hatsue married Kazuo in the camps under pressure from her parents; does she love him? Is he guilty? The only weakness in the film is its treatment of Kazuo, who is not seen in three dimensions but primarily through Ishmaels eyes. He is the man, after all, who has shared his life with Hatsue, and if they were married in the camps, well, people of Ishmaels color put them there. Imagine the same triangle involving Jews and Nazis and see how it feels. We sympathize with Ishmael. Would we sympathize with the Nazis? Because the movie is centered on Ishmaels point of view, Kazuo is the interloper, the thief of love, and now probably a killer as well. From Kazuos point of view, which we can only infer, his society has put him behind barbed wire, discriminated against him and now is rushing to a prejudiced judgment, while its representative stands ready to snatch away his bride. The movie never really sees him clearly. It places him over there at the defense table, or in long shot, objectively. It doesnt need him as a fully fleshed person, because he functions as a symbol and obstacle."
This may however be a weakness the film has to accept in order to get where it is going, because we need fears and confusions to make it more than just a courtroom drama. If we knew Kazuo better, we might have a better notion of whether he could kill someone, and that would not help the story. In most movie trials we make fairly good guesses about guilt and innocence, but here there is real doubt, which plays against the bittersweetness of lost love.
And then there is the care given to the opposing attorneys, who are seen as quite particular people, especially Von Sydow, as Nels Gudmundsson, whose hands shake and whose voice sometimes trembles with anger as he defends the principles that drew him to immigrate to this land. The summation to the jury is a set piece in countless movies; rarely have I seen one better acted.
"Snow Falling on Cedars" is Scott Hicks\ first film since "
Shine
," the 1996 story of the pianist seized with paralyzing doubts. In both films he sees his stories as a whole, circling to their centers instead of starting at the beginning and trekking through. This film, written by
Ron Bass
and Hicks from the novel by
David Guterson
", is unusually satisfying in the way it unfolds. We dont feel the time structure is a gimmick, but that we learn what we need to know for each scene."
Some of them are of particular power, as when the Japanese Americans are ordered from their homes by local authorities, told to take no more than will fit in a suitcase and driven away to the internment "centers." We have seen scenes like this in stories about the Holocaust and in parables of the future in which America has become a totalitarian state. Not everyone in the audience will realize it actually happened here.

Children of a Lesser God 1986 Cast
William Hurt as James
Marlee Matlin as Sarah
Piper Laurie as Mrs. Norman
Philip Bosco as Dr. Franklin
Allison Gompf as Lydia
John F. Cleary as Johnny
Philip Holmes as Glen
Directed by Randa Haines
Produced by Burt Sugarman
Patrick Palmer Screenplay by
Hesper Anderson Mark Medoff
Photographed by John Seale
Edited by Lisa Fruchtman
Music by Michael Convertino
Drama, Romance Rated R
119 minutes I suppose this sounds like the complaint of a crank, but I would have admired "Children of a Lesser God" more if some of its scenes had been played without the benefit of a soundtrack. If a story is about the battle of two people over the common ground on which they will communicate, it\s not fair to make the whole movie on the terms of only one of them.
"The movie is a love story, a romance between a young woman who is deaf and a rebellious teacher who believes she should learn to read lips and speak phonetically. She doesnt think so. Shes been using sign language all of her life, and her argument is simple: If he loves her, he will enter her world of silence."
Although this disagreement is at the heart of "Children of a Lesser God," the movie makes a deliberate decision to exist in the world of the hearing. I know why they made this decision. It was dictated by the box office, but that doesn\t make me feel any better about it. There is a certain cynicism at work here: Most of the people who see this movie will be able to hear, and although they may welcome the challenge of a movie about a deaf person, they aren\t so interested that they want to experience deafness.
The movie uses a strategy that works well - if you accept the basic premise, which is that everything said on the screen must be heard on the soundtrack.
Marlee Matlin
, who plays the deaf woman, signs all of her dialogue, and
William Hurt
, who plays the teacher, then repeats it aloud, as if to himself. "I like to hear the sound of my own voice," he says at one point, and indeed he does such a smooth and natural job of translation that the strategy works.
But think for a minute: Hurt can hear and can read sign language; Marlin\s cannot hear or she claims read lips, and can only communicate by signing. In many movies about two major characters, there are scenes from two points of view. In "Children of a Lesser God," the scenes between the two of them are from Hurt\s point of view, and none of them are played without sound.
"Im not suggesting silent scenes where we have to guess what the sign language means. But how about a few silent scenes in which the signs are translated by subtitles, giving us something of the same experience that deaf people have they see the signs, and then the subtitles, so to speak, are supplied by their intelligence."
The feeling of seeing Hurt and not hearing him, of looking out at him from a silent world, would have underlined the true subject of this movie, which is communication between two people who speak differently.
"By telling the whole story from Hurts point of view, the movie makes the woman into the stubborn object, the challenge, the problem, which is the very process it wants to object to."
This objection aside, "Children of a Lesser God" is a good but not a great movie. The subject matter is new and challenging, and I was interested in everything the movie had to tell me about deafness.
"Unfortunately, the love story is a fairly predictable series of obligatory scenes, made different only by the ways the characters talk to one another. I kept waiting for scenes in which Hurt and Matlin would discuss honestly the problems inherent in their relationship: If she refuses to learn to lip-read, she will be able to exist freely only at the deaf school, which means she is asking him to sacrifice great areas of his own life. Has she thought this through? We dont know."
"I also dont know why the movie ignores all of the other ways the deaf have found to communicate. I am writing this review, for example, on a 4-pound, battery-powered portable computer, and I know that for many deaf people these machines represent an excellent substitute for the telephone."
"Children of a Lesser God" is not a movie about deafness, but a love story in which deafness is used as a poignant gimmick. I was reminded of such movies as "
Love Story
," with its dying heroine; "The Other Side of the Mountain," with its paraplegic heroine, and various other movies in which one of the lovers was blind, lame or from another planet. Most of the movies in this genre seem to treat the handicap as sort of a bonus, conferring greater moral authenticity on the handicapped character. This is a form of subtle condescension.
Despite my argument with the method of "Children of a Lesser God," I found a lot to admire, especially in the acting. The performances are strong and wonderful - not only by Hurt, one of the best actors of his generation, but also by Matlin, a deaf actress who is appearing in her first movie. She holds her own against the powerhouse she\s acting with, carrying scenes with a passion and almost painful fear of being rejected and hurt, which is really what her rebellion is about.
Among the supporting characters,
Piper Laurie
"does a good job with a thankless role as Matlins mother. And I enjoyed the studied cynicism that"
Philip Bosco
put into the role of the old pro who runs the school for the deaf.
"Children of a Lesser God" is a competent, professional docudrama.
"It could have been more. Film is the medium of the visual and should be ideally suited to a story about a person who cannot hear, but only if the movie invites us inside that world and invites - even forces - us to an act of empathy. Making a sound movie about the deaf is a little like making a silent movie about the blind. It may be well-made, but doesnt it evade the point?"

Happiness 1998 Cast
Jane Adams as Joy Jordan
Lara Flynn Boyle as Helen Jordan
Cynthia Stevenson as Trish Maplewood
Dylan Baker as Bill Maplewood
Philip Seymour Hoffman as Allen
Camryn Manheim as Kristina
Louise Lasser as Mona Jordan
Ben Gazzara as Lenny Jordan
Written and Directed by Todd Solondz
Comedy, Drama, Indie Rated NR
Language, Sexuality, Extreme Adult Themes 140 minutes
Todd Solondz
\s "Happiness" is a film that perplexes its viewers, even those who admire it, because it challenges the ways we attempt to respond to it. Is it a portrait of desperate human sadness? Then why are we laughing? Is it an ironic comedy? Then why its tenderness with these lonely people? Is it about depravity? Yes, but why does it make us suspect, uneasily, that the depraved are only seeking what we all seek, but with a lack of ordinary moral vision? In a film that looks into the abyss of human despair, there is the horrifying suggestion that these characters may not be grotesque exceptions, but may in fact be part of the mainstream of humanity. Whenever a serial killer or a sex predator is arrested, we turn to the paper to find his neighbors saying that the monster "seemed just like anyone else." "Happiness" is a movie about closed doors--apartment doors, bedroom doors and the doors of the unconscious. It moves back and forth between several stories, which often link up. It shows us people who want to be loved and who never will be--because of their emotional incompetence and arrested development. There are lots of people who do find love and fulfillment, but they are not in this movie.
We meet Joy 
Jane Adams
", who has just broken up with the loser shes been dating "
Jon Lovitz
. He gives her a present, an engraved reproduction ashtray he got through mail order, but after she thanks him "It almost makes me want to learn to smoke" he viciously grabs it back: "This is for the girl who loves me for who I am." We meet Allen 
Philip Seymour Hoffman
, who describes pornographic sexual fantasies to his therapist 
Dylan Baker
 and then concludes that he will never realize them because he is too boring. The therapist, named Bill, is indeed bored. Later Bill buys a teen-idol magazine and masturbates while looking at the photos.
"We meet Joys two sisters, Trish "
Cynthia Stevenson
 and Helen 
Lara Flynn Boyle
. Trish is a chirpy housewife, who is married to Bill the psychiatrist but knows nothing of his pedophilia. Helen is a poet who drops names "Salman is on the line" and describes the countless men who lust for her. The parents of the three sisters 
Louise Lasser
and
Ben Gazzara
 have been married for years, but now Lenny wants to leave. Not to fool around. Just to be alone.
We meet Kristina 
Camryn Manheim
, a fat girl who lives down the hall from the solitary Allen, and knocks on his door to announce that Pedro, the doorman, has been murdered. His body has been dismembered and put in plastic bags: "Everyone uses Baggies. That\s why we can relate to this crime." Allen doesn\t want to know. He leafs through porno magazines, gets drunk and makes obscene phone calls. One of his calls goes to the woman he fantasies about. It is Helen, the "popular" sister, who enjoys his heavy breathing and calls him back.
We get the sense of warehouses of strangers--of people stacked into the sky in lonely apartments, each one hiding secrets. We watch in sadness and unease as Bill the shrink attends his son Billy\s Little League game and becomes enraptured by one of his teammates. When the other boy has a "sleep-over" with Billy, Bill drugs his family and molests the young boy not shown onscreen.
Later, there is a heartbreaking conversation between Billy and his father. Billy is isolated in closeup and we assume the young actor is reading the lines without knowing what the older actor is saying. Their talk lingers in uneasy memory. The boy has been told at school that his father is a molester. He asks his dad if it is true. His father says it is. In a scene of pain and sadness, the boy asks more questions and the father answers simply, briefly and completely honestly. A friend who saw the movie told me, "Instead of lying, he kept telling him the truth, regardless of how hard that was for both of them. The honesty may be the one thing that saves the son from the immense damage done by the father." Well, I hope so.
"Happiness" occupies the emerging genre of the New Geek Cinema, films that occupy the shadowland between tragedy and irony. Todd Solondz also made "Welcome to the Dollhouse" 1996, about an unpopular 11-year-old girl who defiantly improvises survival tactics. "Happiness" is harder to take, and yet equally attentive to the suffering of characters who see themselves outside the mainstream--geeks, if you will, whose self-image is formed by the conviction that the more people know about them, the less they\ll like them.
Why see the film? "Happiness" is about its unhappy characters, in a way that helps us see them a little more clearly, to feel sorry for them, and at the same time to see how closely tragedy and farce come together in the messiness of sexuality. Does "Happiness" exploit its controversial subjects? Finally, no: It sees them as symptoms of desperation and sadness. It is more exploitative to create a child molester as a convenient villain, as many movies do; by disregarding his humanity and seeing him as an object, such movies do the same thing that a molester does.
These are the kinds of thoughts "Happiness" inspires. It is not a film for most people. It is certainly for adults only. But it shows Todd Solondz as a filmmaker who deserves attention, who hears the unhappiness in the air and seeks its sources.

This is England 2007 Cast
Thomas Turgoose as Shaun
Joe Gilgun as Woody
Stephen Graham as Combo
Andrew Shim as Milky
Jo Hartley "as Shauns mom"
Written and directed by Shane Meadows
Crime, Drama, Foreign, Indie Rated R
for strong racist violence and language 101 minutes
"A burning need is the first thing we see in Shauns eyes. He needs a father, he needs to be taller and stronger, he needs to dress like the other kids dress, he needs to fit in somewhere. Shaun, played by"
Thomas Turgoose
in one of those performances that seem more like self-discovery than an act of will, is 12 years old and lives at the shabby end of a town in Yorkshire, not far from the sea. It is July 1983, and his father has been killed in the Falklands War; he takes the death as a kind of betrayal.
"There isnt much money in the family. His mother "
Jo Hartley
 throws up her hands when he complains about his lack of Doc Martens shoes, without which a boy his age might as well stay home. She sacrifices to buy him some lookalikes, and when he complains they\re not the real thing, she says they\re better: "These are from London!" All the same.
Shaun is always getting beaten up and picked on, until one day he cuts through an underpass and meets a gang of skinheads led by Woody 
Joe Gilgun
. Woody is friendly. Cheers him up. Tells him he can come around again. Soon Shaun has a surrogate family and a new social group and a better self-image, especially when one of the gang girls shaves off his curly hair.
His mother is horrified. She marches Shaun down to the cafe where the gang hangs out, wants to know who did this to her son and asks, "Don\t you think he\s a little young to be hanging around with your lot?" Then, curiously, she leaves Shaun in their care. You could spend a lot of time thinking about why she does that.
Shane Meadows\ "This Is England" focuses on a specific tipping point in the history of English skinheads. As we meet the gang, it is somewhat benign and not racist Milky, played by
Andrew Shim
, is Afro-Caribbean. Shaun has, in a sense, a new family, and even gets his first kiss, from a goth girl who likes him. Then Combo 
Stephen Graham
" is released from prison, and with the lessons he learned there, teaches them violence, looting and racism. When the gang splits in two, Shaun makes the mistake of following Combo, maybe because he is more impressed by his strength than Woodys friendship."
All of this takes place nearly 25 years ago in England, but it could take place today in any American city. Poverty, absent fathers and dangerous streets make gang membership seem like a safe haven, and soon Shaun is aping the bigger guys, swaggering around, disregarding his mother, getting in trouble.
Meadows knows this world. The director of such films as "
Once Upon A Time In The Midlands
" 2003, a portrait of working-class life, he says he was a skinhead at about Shaun\s age. Other films, like Alan Clarke\s "Made in Britain" 1982, with its early
Tim Roth
"performance, also show the strange attraction to violence that grows in such gangs: Do they hurt and get hurt out of hatred, alienation, fear, or a compulsion to fit into the gang? When two gangs fight, is that essentially a mutual initiation ceremony? In England, certainly at that time, handguns were not easy to own, so at least the body count was low. Guns and cars make accidental drive-by killings common in Chicago, where the gangs have it easy; when youre on foot, its rare to murder a 6-year-old girl when youre really after her neighbor."
"The movie is taut, tense, relentless. It shows why Shaun feels he needs to belong to a gang, what he gets out of it and how it goes wrong. Without saying so, it also explains why skinheads are skinheads: Any threatened group has a tendency to require its members to adopt various costumes, hair or presentation styles that mark them as members, so they cant deny it or escape it, and the group can exercise authority even at a distance."
"What happens at the end is part of history: Skinheads became allied with the neo-Nazi National Front. They became violent toward nonwhites and immigrants. It wasnt so much that they hated them, perhaps, as that they needed an enemy to validate themselves, because they felt as worthless as they said their opponents were. Whenever you see one group demonizing another group, what they charge the others with is often what they fear about themselves. For Shaun, this is more than he was looking for. Better to be lonely than to be deprived of the right to be alone."

The Hunted 2003 Cast
Tommy Lee Jones as L.T. Bonham
Benicio Del Toro as Aaron Hallam
Connie Nielsen as Abby Durrell
Jenna Boyd as Loretta Kravitz
Leslie Stefanson as Irene Kravitz
Robert Blanche as Crumley
Directed by William Friedkin
Written by David Griffiths
Peter Griffiths Art Monterastelli
Action, Adventure, Thriller Rated R
For Strong Bloody Violence and Some Language 94 minutes
"The Hunted" is a pure and rather inspired example of the one-on-one chase movie. Like "
The Fugitive
," which also starred
Tommy Lee Jones
", its about one man pursuing another more or less nonstop for the entire film. Walking in, I thought I knew what to expect, but i didnt anticipate how"
William Friedkin
"would jolt me with the immediate urgency of the action. This is not an arms-length chase picture, but a close physical duel between its two main characters. Jones plays L.T. Bonham, a civilian employee of the U.S. Army who trains elite forces to stalk, track, hunt and kill. His men learn how to make weapons out of shards of rock, and forge knives from scrap metal. In a sequence proving we havent seen everything yet, they learn how to kill an enemy by the numbers--leg artery, heart, neck, lung. That Jones can make this training seem real goes without saying; he has an understated, minimalist acting style that implies hes been teaching the class for a long time."
One of his students is Aaron Hallam 
Benicio
Del Toro
, who fought in Kosovo in 1999 and had experiences there that warped him "his battle stress has gone so deep it is part of his personality". Back home in Oregon, offended by hunters using telescopic sights, he claims four victims--"those hunters were filleted like deer." Bonham recognizes the style and goes into the woods after him "If I\m not back in two days, that will mean I\m dead".
"Hallams stress syndrome has made him into a radical defender of animal rights; he talks about chickens on assembly lines, and asks one cop how hed feel if a higher life form were harvesting mankind. Of course, in killing the hunters, he has promoted himself to that superior lifeform, but this is not a movie about debate points. It is a chase."
No modern director is more identified with chases that Friedkin, whose "
The French Connection
" and "To Live and Die in L.A." set the standard. Here the whole movie is a chase, sometimes at a crawl, as when Hallam drives a stolen car directly into a traffic jam. What makes the movie fresh is that it doesn\t stand back and regard its pursuit as an exercise, but stays very close to the characters and focuses on the actual physical reality of their experience.
"Consider an early hand-to-hand combat between Bonham and Hallam. Weve seen so many fancy high-tech computer-assisted fight scenes in recent movies that we assume the fighters can fly. They live in a world of gravity-free speed-up. Not so Friedkins characters. Their fight is gravity-based. Their arms and legs are heavy. Their blows land solidly, with pain on both sides. They gasp and grunt with effort. They can be awkward and desperate. They both know the techniques of hand-to-hand combat, but in real life, it isnt scripted, and you know what? It isnt so easy. We are involved in the immediate, exhausting, draining physical work of fighting."
The chase sequences--through Oregon forests and city streets, on highways and bridges--are also reality-oriented. The cinematography, by the great
Caleb Deschanel
"
The Right Stuff
" buries itself in the reality of the locations. The forests are wet and green, muddy and detailed. The leaves are not scenery but right in front of our faces, to be brushed aside. Running, hiding, stalking, the two men get dirty and tired and gasp for breath. We feel their physical effort; this isn\t one of those movies where shirts are dry again in the next scene, and the hero has the breath for long speeches.
"The Hunted" requires its skilled actors. Ordinary action stars would not do. The screenplay, by
David Griffiths
,
Peter Griffiths
and
Art Monterastelli
", has a kind of minimalist clarity, in which nobody talks too much and everything depends on tone. Notice scenes where Del Toro is interrogated by other law officials. He doesnt give us the usual hostile, aggressive cliches, but seems to be trying to explain himself from a place so deep he cant make it real to outsiders. This man doesnt kill out of rage but out of sorrow."
There are moments when Friedkin lays it on a little thick. The early how-to sequence, where Bonham\s trainees learn how to make weapons from scratch, implies there will be a later sequence where they need to. Fair enough. But would Hallam, in the heat of a chase, have the time to build a fire from shavings, heat an iron rod, and hammer it into a knife? Even if Bonham cooperates by meanwhile pausing to chip his own flint weapon? Maybe not, or maybe the two hunters are ritualistically agreeing to face each other using only these tools of their trade. The resulting knife fight, which benefits from the earlier knife training sequence, is physical action of a high order. There are other characters in the movie, other relationships. A woman with a child, who Hallam visits she likes him but is a little afraid. A woman who is an FBI field officer. Various cops. They add background and atmosphere, but "The Hunted" is about two hard-working men who are good at their jobs, although only one can be the best.

LUV 2013 Cast
Common as Vincent
Michael Rainey Jr. as Woody
Dennis Haysbert as Mr. Fish
Danny Glover as Arthur
Charles S. Dutton as Colfield
Lonette McKee as Grandma
Directed by Sheldon Candis
Written by Candis
Justin Wilson Drama
Rated R for violence, language, child endangerment and some drug content
95 minutes "This film tells such a sad story. You dont realize that at first. You think you know whats going to happen, and it will be conventional and comforting. We see an 11-year-old kid waking up in the morning, getting dressed, using his water pistol to aim at the mirror, and going in to breakfast with his grandmother and his uncle."
"Its a comfortable African-American home in Baltimore. His Uncle Vincent Common, who drives a Benz, gives him a ride to school. Theres a cute girl on the school steps who smiles at him in a flirty way. Woody Michael Rainey Jr. is a little shy and embarrassed. Vincent encourages him to smile back. Nothing doing. So he drives away from the school, just like that, and announces theyre spending the day together."
"This involves taking Woody to a neighborhood tailor, who fits him into a nice-looking suit and tie. Vincent tells him he has to present himself like a man. It was later in the movie that it occurred to me this visit wasnt simply a nice gesture. Was it part of a plan slowly in the uncles mind, in which he might have a use for a well-dressed 11-year-old?"
"Nuno Malos music is serious and not terribly hopeful. Quiet, in the background, it broods as the man and the boy begin an odyssey around Baltimore. Facts randomly emerge. Vincent is fresh out of prison, having been given an early release. When the judicial system grants an early release, that doesnt always send a reassuring message to the prisoners old friends. We learn that Vincent has plans to close a bank loan for his business project, a crab house on the waterfront."
"There are a lot of crabs in the movie, and even a little lesson about how to crack and eat one, because Woody has never eaten a crab before, and that will simply not do for a young man from Baltimore. So theres another lesson for the kid. The whole day and night will consist of Vincent and Woody driving around Baltimore and teaching and receiving lessons."
At this point, Sheldon Candis\ "LUV" still seems on safe ground. That\s largely because of the presence of Common, the Chicago-born hip-hop artist. His character is focused on teaching Woody how to stand, speak, carry himself, look another person in the eye, and act like he\s a considerable person. As Woody, the young actor Michael Rainey Jr. fits comfortably into his role, transforming himself from a squirmy, uncertain child into a young man who learns to do all of these things. That it does it in only about 24 hours is unlikely, but the film isn\t concerned about being taken seriously on that level. It is about one generation learning from another. It grows darker and darker. When it ends, as I said, it is very sad.
"Spoilers ahead. What happens is that Vincent essentially puts Woody on the path to being himself. The child goes along on a visit to a bank, which reveals that Vincents business plan is delusional. He meets Mr. Fish "
Dennis Haysbert
 and Arthur 
Danny Glover
, both relatives of some sort, and Cofield 
Charles S. Dutton
", an old partner in Vincents criminal activities. These men laugh too much. They hug and smile, but we feel the ice in their veins. One or more betrayals are under way."
"Woody will be taught lessons of manhood, such as how to drive a car, how to shoot a gun, how to hide a stash, how to lie and bluff. The one thing he doesnt learn is how to smoke. People dont smoke nearly as much in the movies these days. Its a chilling fact that it would be more disturbing for us to see Woody with a cigarette in his mouth than with a gun in his hand."
"Its a mentor-child relationship, with a mentor who is desperate and can teach the child only how to be as desperate as he is. Its Fagin and Oliver Twist, bleaker than Dickens could have imagined. Ill stop now. I wont reveal any more of the plot as the film descends into despair."
What was in Sheldon Candis\ mind as he made "LUV"? Here is a film about African Americans that sidesteps all the usual, hopeful cliches and comments on how one failed generation raises another. This is how the gun and crime culture is passed along. This is how a nice kid in middle school has his life destroyed for him — unless he is very lucky and learns a lesson from these 24 hours in a nightmare.

Greenberg 2010 Cast
Ben Stiller as Roger Greenberg
Greta Gerwig as Florence
Rhys Ifans as Ivan
Jennifer Jason Leigh as Beth
Brie Larson as Sara
Mark Duplass as Eric
Written and directed by Noah Baumbach
Based on a story by Jennifer Jason Leigh
Comedy, Drama, Romance Rated R
for strong sexuality, drug use and language 107 minutes
"When youre angry with the world and yourself to the same degree, youre running in place. It takes a great deal of energy. It can be exhausting. You lash out at people. Youre hard on yourself. It all takes place in your head. After a time people give up on you. They think you dont give a damn and dont care about yourself. If they only knew."
"Thats Roger Greenberg. I never knew who"
Ben Stiller
"was born to play, but now I do. I dont mean he"
is
Greenberg, but that he makes him a convincing person and not a caricature. The hero of
Noah Baumbach
"s new film was once, years ago, part of a rock band on the brink of a breakthrough. He walked away from it, stranding his band- mates, and never explained why. He fled Los Angeles and became a carpenter in New York."
He\s been struggling. There has been some sort of vague period in an institution. Now he\s returned to L.A. to house-sit his brother\s big home and look after the dog. He glares out of the windows like old man Fredricksen in "
Up
." He can live alone no more successfully than with others. He calls Florence Marr 
Greta Gerwig
", his brothers family assistant, who knows where everything is and how everything works. And the dog knows her."
Florence is someone we know. A bright, pleasant recent college graduate for whom the job market, as they say, has no use. We see her interacting with the family of Greenberg\s brother; she does all the planning for them she should be doing for herself. In a more conventional movie, Florence would be the love interest, and Greenberg would be fated to marry her. But Florence isn\t looking for a man. She just broke up. "I don\t want to go from just having sex to sex to sex," she says. "Who\s the third \sex\?" asks Greenberg. "You."
"I have a weakness for actresses like Greta Gerwig. She looks reasonable and approachable. Some actresses are all edges and polish. This one, you could look up and see her walking dreamily through a bookstore, possibly with a Penguin Classic already in her hand. Greenberg treats her badly. He has no notion of his effect on people. When they end up having sex, and they do, its like their right hands dont know what heir left hands are doing."
Noah Baumbach made the inspired "
The Squid and the Whale
" 2005, about a formidably articulate family torn apart by a divorce. Both parents were at fault to various degrees, and both sons could have done more in their own way to help the situation. Everyone obsessed on their grievances. Greenberg takes this a step further: He obsesses on the grievances against him.
He has a reunion with a former bandmate, Ivan 
Rhys Ifans
, a calm Brit, troubled by a trial separation, happy enough to see Greenberg and help him if he can. But Ivan is troubled that Greenberg
still
"doesnt get it, doesnt understand how he crushed the dreams of his bandmates. Then theres Beth "
Jennifer Jason Leigh
", who Greenberg once loved and was loved by. She has moved on in her life. She has a family. Does he recognize the look a woman gets in her eyes when shes thinking how that just would have never, ever, worked out? Does he have enough self-knowledge to see how impossible he is?"
"The important relationship is the one between Greenberg and Florence. We look upon her and see wholesome health and abundant energy. Shes happy when she has a purpose. She wishes she had a direction in life but can be happy enough in the moment. Its as if when Greenberg moves a little in the direction of happiness, it gets jealous because that draws attention away from his miserable uniqueness. People driven to be constantly unique can be a real pain in the ass."
"This is an intriguing film, shifting directions, considering Greenbergs impossibility in one light and then another. If hes stuck like this at 40, is he stuck for good? What Ben Stiller does with the role is fascinating. We cant stand Greenberg. But we begin to care about him. Without ever overtly evoking sympathy, Stiller inspires identification. You dont have to like the hero of a movie. But you have to understand him -- better than he does himself, in some cases."

A Little Help 2011 Cast
Jenna Fischer as Laura
"Chris ODonnell" as Bob
Daniel Yelsky as Dennis
Kim Coates as Mel Kaminsky
Lesley Ann Warren as Joan
Ron Leibman as Warren
Brooke Smith as Kathy
Aida Turturro as Nancy Feldman
Written and directed by Michael J. Weithorn
Comedy, Drama Rated R
for language, some sexual content and drug use 81 minutes
"A Little Help" is about a woman who is very far from perfect, and that\s why it\s appealing. Laura limps through her days using Budweisers as a crutch. She never gets falling-over drunk, just buzzed enough to screw up when things go wrong, which they do relentlessly. I like her. I\ve had days like hers. Every once in a while, I appreciate a change of pace from mothers who are brave heroines.
Laura is a New Jersey dental hygienist, played by
Jenna Fischer
"The Office" in such a way that although the plot is loaded against her, she\s so real she wins our sympathy. She\s not a bad person. Life piles up on her. She has a husband 
"Chris ODonnell"
 who cheats, a son 
Daniel Yelsky
 who is a lying little brat, a mother 
Lesley Ann Warren
 who has been criticizing her from birth, a father 
Ron Leibman
" who wont shut up about his greatness as a sports writer, and a sister "
Brooke Smith
" who isnt as pretty but is oh, so much better organized."
There are two men in her family she can stand: Her brother-in-law Rob Benedict, and her nephew Zach Page, whose garage band may be an excuse to get out of the house.
These people almost seem to coordinate their picking on Laura. Someone is always on her case. The screenplay by
Michael J. Weithorn
", who also directed, is ingenious in setting the stage for one calamity after another — one which should remain a surprise, and the others all developing inexorably out of Lauras tendency to fib her way out of a corner. This is a talent shared by her son, who to fit in at his new school, shares that his father was a fireman who died while saving people on 9/11. Since the movie is set only a year after that tragedy, the kid is rewarded with instant popularity; Laura keeps quiet about his lie and actually participates in a patriotic memorial service at the school."
"If youre in for a dime, youre in for a dollar. Laura gets in for about five bucks. Money she doesnt have — because she learns her husband, who suddenly dies, was far from provident. This leads to painful sessions with a salivating litigator "
Kim Coates
", who thinks she could win a big-time lawsuit. She only agrees to meet the guy in the first place because her controlling sister insists on it. Laura doesnt like lawsuits. I agree. You may win, you may lose, but the lawyers on both sides always get paid."
I haven\t given a good enough notion of why "A Little Help" worked so well for me. It\s manipulative, yes, but clever and persuasive in its manipulations. It has a bittersweet revelation when the brother-in-law confides he only married Laura\s hateful sister so he could be… her brother-in-law. There is a day of crisis at her son\s school, which Laura tries desperately to head off, and I was with her all the way.
"And mostly I just plain like Jenna Fischer. She plays a woman who is smart, plucky, trying to do the right thing, and going through a period when every damn thing goes wrong. She deserves better. We believe that, and its why the movie succeeds. Yes, she could be a better mother for little Dennis, her brat. But hes going through one of those phases when a kid idolizes one parent and pretends to hate the other. Something like that gets on your nerves."

Sylvester 1985 Cast
Richard Farnsworth as Foster
Melissa Gilbert as Charlie
Michael Schoeffling as Matt
production Rastar
Directed by Tim Hunter
Written by Carol Sobieski
Produced Drama, Family
Rated PG 104 minutes
Hollywood has never exactly had a shortage of movies about teenage girls and brave horses, and I was not exactly looking forward to "Sylvester," which stars
Melissa Gilbert
as a teenage girl with a horse so brave that its full name is
Sylvester Stallone
. I was dreading one of those movies where the horse is almost human, and after the girl starts to cry, the horse nudges her and tries to cheer her up.
Maybe that\s why "Sylvester" came as such a genuine surprise: There is a good movie here, obscured by a tired old formula. Gilbert plays a tough, determined teenager who is raising her two younger brothers herself - and trying to keep them out of the hands of court-appointed guardians. Her ambition in life is to train horses, and she starts with Sylvester, an unsophisticated Western bucking horse who does not look like the sort of animal you\d expect to see in the Olympic steeplechase trials.
"The complications in the plot are set up right away: The intervention by the court officials, the challenge of training the horse and the problem of what to do about Gilberts old boyfriend "
Michael Schoeffling
, especially since they still love each other. Gilbert turns to a father figure, a grizzled, drunken old cowboy 
Richard Farnsworth
", who knows all about horses, all about human nature and even a little bit about teenage girls. She wants him to provide a home for herself and her brothers, and supervise Sylvesters training sessions."
Farnsworth protests: He\s already paid his dues as a father and nursemaid. But Gilbert prevails, and the scenes between the two are charged with the kinds of tension and affection that make even routine situations seem real. This is, in fact, Farnsworth\s season. He is also wonderful in a small role as a dying tycoon in the generally undistinguished "
Into the Night
."
"Sylvester" contains, of course, the usual number of obligatory scenes. We know we\ll see the horse being trained. We know we\ll see Gilbert almost breaking her neck. We know we\ll see Farnsworth looking at his watch and allowing as how maybe that damned horse does have a chance. And we also rather suspect that the horse doesn\t get all the way to Kentucky only to lose.
"The movie doesnt disappoint us at those obligatory moments, but it has a lot of surprises, as well. One of them is the low-key but mature way it treats the romance between Gilbert and Schoeffling. They have a quiet little PG-rated love scene together that is tactful, honest and, in its own way, rather bold."
Gilbert is best known for her work on TVs "The Little House on the Prairie." This is her first movie. She has real presence, and a much more interesting and resilient acting style than you might expect from someone raised on a network assembly line. "Sylvester" itself probably started out as little more than a classy steeplechase version of "
Rocky
," but Gilbert, Farnsworth and a good script turn it into something surprisingly better.

Return of the Jedi 1983 Cast
Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker
Harrison Ford as Han Solo
Carrie Fisher as Princess Leia
Billy Dee Williams as Lando Calrissian
Anthony Daniels as C-3PO
David Prowse as Darth Vader
James Earl Jones "as Vaders Voice"
Alec Guinness as Obi-Wan Kenobi
Directed by Richard Marquand
Produced by Howard Kazanjian
From a screenplay by Lawrence Kasdan
Screenplay by George Lucas
Photographed by Alan Hume
Music by John Williams
Action, Adventure, Family, Fantasy, Science Fiction Rated PG
135 minutes “Return of the Jedi” completes the epic “Star Wars” cycle with\rthe final destruction of the Empire and the inevitable faceoff between Luke\rSkywalker and the evil Darth Vader, now revealed, as we surmised, to be his\rfather. The film has a tone of its own. If “Star Wars” was a brash space opera\rand “
The Empire Strikes Back
"” was a visual feast, “Return of the Jedi” is a\rriot of character invention. We get a good look at Jabba the Hutt and his\rcourt; we meet the fuzzy-wuzzy Ewoks, and we are confronted by two wonderfully\rloathsome creatures--the beast in the dungeon beneath Jabbas throne room and\rthe desert monster made of teeth and gullet."
"If I had to choose, I would say this is the least of the Star\rWars films. It lacks the startling originality of the first two. Its more\rconcerned with loose ends and final resolutions. It was the correct decision\rfor"
George Lucas
to end with a trilogy and then move to another point in time\rfor the continuation of the saga. To return to these characters a fourth time\rwould destroy the mythic structure of the story and turn it simply into a\rseries.
Still, there are inspired things here. The early scenes are\rdominated by Jabba the Hutt, whose cavern is populated with lots of small\robnoxious creatures in the corners and a grotesque intergalactic jazz band that\rseems to have been improvised along with its music. Secure in his lair, Jabba\rhas Han Solo frozen in a sculpture on the wall, and eventually takes all of our\rheroes captive. His gurgling voice is wonderfully reprehensible, and he squats\rbeneath his cavern ceiling like a stalagmite of slime. It has been observed\rthat Jabba seems much larger here than in “Star Wars.” Some say it is because\rhe is on a platform; some say it is an optical illusion. I suggest that a hutt\ris a slug, and slugs continue to grow all of their lives.
"The monster in the dungeon, made of teeth and scales, is the\rembodiment of disgusting aggression, and yet its death provides one of the\rmovies finest moments. The creature is crushed beneath a heavy door, and then\rwe see its keeper come forward, weeping to have lost his pet. Its a throwaway\rmoment, but typical of the films richness."
"An extended sequence takes place in the desert, where Jabbas\rHovercraft positions itself over the creature in the sand, which seems to\rconsist primarily as a large digestive system. He intends to force his captives\rto walk the plank, but the tables are nicely turned. I have always felt Lucas\rlost an opportunity here; since Jabba obviously must die at some point, why not\rfeed him to the sand thing? I can envision the Hutts globular body slithering\ralong the plank and plopping down into the big open mouth--and then being spit\rup again, as too unsavory even for this eating machine. Final shot: green gooey\rJabba-stuff dissolving in the monsters digestive juices under a pitiless sun."
"The Ewoks never referred to by name in the film are cute and\rbring a kind of innocence to the Forest Moon, where the power station for the\rorbiting Death Star is located. Their forest provides the location for the\rmovies most inexplicable sequences, in which characters chase one another on\rhigh-speed hover-scooters. As you know if you have seen the film and USA Today\rassures us the average American has seen it several times, bad guys regularly\rget wiped out by running their scooters into trees. Question: Isnt a thickly\rforested area the wrong venue for these vehicles? How about flying above the\rtreetops, where theres nothing to run into?"
This third movie lacks the resonance that Obi-Wan and Yoda\rbrought to the second one they make cameo appearances, but are not major\rplayers. We see a great deal more, however, of Darth and the Emperor, who\rlooks uncannily like Death in “
The Seventh Seal
.” There is, of course, the\rclimactic moment when Vader reveals his real face, allowing the character to\rbecome the first in movie history to be played by three actors body by David\rProwse, voice by
James Earl Jones
, face by
Sebastian Shaw
". By this third\rinstallment, I think, weve seen quite enough of the swordplay with laserbeams,\rand those scenes could be shortened. The Sharper Image catalog, I see, is\roffering replicas of the lightsabers for $350 to $450--pricy, when you consider\rthe original prop was a photoflash grip."
"At the end of it all, after the three movies, weve taken an\repic fantasy journey. Lucas has in common with all great storytellers the\rability to create a complete world. These films may spring from space opera,\rscience-fiction and Saturday serials, but they are done so superbly that they\rtranscend all genres and become a reverberating place in our imaginations."
Thinking back over the three, I find that the most compelling\rcharacters are Darth Vader, Yoda, and Obi-Wan Kenobi. That is because their\rlives and thoughts are entirely focused on the Force. To the degree that\rcharacters have distance from the Force, they resonate less: Skywalker is\rimportant, although boyishly shallow, and Princess Leia harbors treasured\rsecrets, but Han Solo, for all his importance to the plot, is not very\rinteresting as a person, and a little of Chewbacca, as observed earlier, goes a\rlong way.
"The droids, R2-D2 and C-3PO, play much the same role here as\rtheir originals did in the movie that inspired them, Kurosawas “The Hidden\rFortress.” Theyre a team, Laurel and Hardy or Vladimir and Estragon, linked\rtogether by fate and personality. The other characters--Lando, Jabba, the Grand\rMoff Tarkin and the many walk-ons and bit players--function, in Eliots words,\rto swell the progress of a scene or two."
"At the end, what are we left with? Marvelous sights: The two\rDeath Stars, the lumbering war machines on the snow planet, space warfare, the\rdesert monster, buckaneering action. Marvelous sounds: the voices of Darth\rVader, Jabba and the chirpy little R2-D2. And an idea--the Force--that in\rencompassing everything may, perhaps, encompass nothing, and conceal another\rlevel above, or beneath. Im guessing that will be the subject of the next\rtrilogy."

Cellular 2004 Cast
Kim Basinger as Jessica Martin
Chris Evans as Ryan
Eric Christian Olsen as Chad
William H. Macy as Mooney
Jason Statham as Greer
Adam Taylor Gordon as Ricky Martin
Rick Hoffman as Porsche owner
Richard Burgi as Craig Martin
Eddie Driscoll as Ronnie
Jessica Biel as Chloe
Directed by David R. Ellis
Written by Larry Cohen
Chris Morgan Action, Adventure, Crime, Thriller
Rated PG-13 for violence, terror situations, language and some sexual references
94 minutes "Cellular" stands "
Phone Booth
" on its head. The 2003 thriller was about a psychopath who threatens
Colin Farrell
with death if he leaves a Manhattan phone booth. The new one has
Chris Evans
"racing desperately all over Los Angeles as he tries to stay on his cell phone with a woman who says shes been kidnapped. The same writer,"
Larry Cohen
, collaborated on both projects and is no doubt currently involved in a thriller about chat rooms.
The plot of "Cellular" sounds like a gimmick, and no wonder: It
is
"a gimmick. Whats surprising is how convincing it is, under the circumstances, and how willingly we accept the premise and get involved in it. The movie is skillfully plotted, halfway plausible and well acted; the craftsmanship is in the details, including the astonishing number of different ways in which a cell phone can be made to function -- both as a telephone, and as a plot device."
Kim Basinger
stars as Jessica, a high school science teacher who is kidnapped by violent home invaders and held prisoner in an attic. The men who have taken her want something from her husband -- something she knows nothing about. They know where her young son Ricky 
Adam Taylor Gordon
 attends school and plan to kidnap him, too. The kidnappers are hard men, especially their cold, intense leader Greer, played by
Jason Statham
". Because theyve allowed Jessica to see them, she assumes they will eventually kill her."
"The attic has a wall phone, which a kidnapper smashes to bits. But Jessica the science teacher is able to fit some of the parts back together and click on the wires to make a call -- at random. She reaches Ryan Chris Evans, a twentysomething kid who at first doesnt believe her when she says she has been kidnapped. At one point, he even puts her on hold; thats part of the movies strategy of building our frustration by creating one believable obstacle after another. Jessica pleads with him not to hang up, to trust her enough to hand his cell phone to a cop. Something in her voice convinces him. He walks into a police station and hands the phone to a desk cop named Mooney "
William H. Macy
", who gets sidetracked and advises him to go to homicide, up on the fourth floor. Uh-huh. But Mooney, too, hears something in her voice, and later in the day it still resonates. Hes not your typical hot-dog movie cop, but a quiet, thoughtful professional with unexpected resources."
"The movies surprises, when they come, mostly seem to make sense. When we find out who the kidnappers are, and what it is they want from Jessicas husband, it doesnt seem like too much of a reach. But the real fun of the movie comes from the hoops Ryan has to jump through in order to somehow stay on the line with Jessica, convince people hes not crazy, and get personally involved in the deadly climax. Yes, the action scenes are over the top, and yes, the chase scenes involve unthinkable carnage on the freeways, but, yes, we go along because the motivations and strategies of the characters are strong and clear."
About the crime and the criminals I will say no more. What\s ingenious about the movie is the way it uses telephones -- and the people who use them. At one point Ryan gets a "low battery" warning and desperately needs a charger, so of course he finds himself in a cell phone store where he is instructed with maddening condescension to take a number and wait his place in line. At another point he comes into the life of a spectacularly obnoxious lawyer 
Rick Hoffman
 and steals his Porsche not once, but twice.
And then there are the ways phones can be used for things other than making calls. Ways they can preserve evidence, maintain callback records, function as an emergency alarm system, convey unintended information, or even betray themselves. Larry Cohen and his co-writer,
Chris Morgan
, must have spent days with their yellow pads, jotting down every use they could think of for a cell phone.
The director,
David R. Ellis
, does have the usual chases and shoot-outs, but he doesn\t depend on them to make his movie work. He\s attentive to how and why the characters behave; he makes it clear what they\re thinking, and he has a good feel for situations in which everything depends on human nature. Basinger, who for such a healthy-looking woman has always been so good at seeming vulnerable, is ideally cast here, and young Chris Evans from "
Not Another Teen Movie
" has a star-making role. But the real juice comes from the old pros Macy, as a dogged cop who might surprise you in a tight spot, and Statham as the leader of the kidnappers. By occupying their roles believably, by acting as we think their characters probably would, they save the movie from feeling like basic Hollywood action even when it probably is. This is one of the year\s best thrillers. Better than "Phone Booth," for my money, and I liked that, too.

Inkheart 2009 Cast
Brendan Fraser as Mo
Eliza Hope Bennett as Meggie
Helen Mirren as Elinor
Paul Bettany as Dustfinger
Jim Broadbent as Fenoglio
Andy Serkis as Capricorn
Directed by Iain Softley
Written by David Lindsay-Abaire
Based on the novel by Cornelia Funke
Adventure, Drama, Family, Fantasy, Science Fiction Rated PG
for fantasy adventure action, scary moments and brief language 106 minutes
I never knew reading was so dangerous. No child seeing "Inkheart" will ever want to be read to again, especially if that child loves its mother, as so many do. Here is a film about a man named Mo, who, when he reads aloud, has the power of liberating fictional characters into the real world. The drawback is that real people are trapped within the same book. Tit for tat. A law of physics must apply.
The film opens with its best scene, for me, anyway: the professional book buyer Mo 
Brendan Fraser
 and Meggie, his 12-year-old daughter 
Eliza Hope Bennett
, poking through an open-air book market. As always I was trying to read the titles on the spines. Not realizing that "Inkheart" is based on a famous fantasy novel, I had the foolish hope the movie might be about books. No luck. Wait till you hear what it\s about.
At the edge of the market is a dark little bookstore presided over by a dark little man. As Mo prowls its aisles, he hears the faint chatter of fictional characters calling to him. Dictionaries must be almost impossible to shut up. Sixth sense leads him to discover, on an obscure shelf, the novel
Inkheart,
in the format of a Penguin mystery from the 1950s. He buys it, slips it into his pocket, and the two of them are followed by a mysterious, skulking man.
"We discover this is the very book Mo was reading when his wife, Meggies mother "
Sienna Guillory
", was sucked into its pages, and that is the true story, Meggie, of how your mom suddenly disappeared when you were little. Yeah, right, dad. At the same time, various demonic creatures were liberated from the books pages. They have now set up shop in a mountaintop castle and are conspiring to command Mos power now that he has discovered their book again. Do they want to return to its pages, or be reunited with old chums in the real world? And how do you get a mortgage to buy a castle when youre a demonic creature and your resume mentions only fictional adventures in an out-of-print book? The banks must have been lending carelessly there a while back."
Mo and Meggie take refuge in a cliffside mansion occupied by her great-aunt Elinor 
Helen Mirren
. Mansion? Looks to me like a dreamy tourist hotel from a Merchant-Ivory production. Elinor is a nasty scold who always wears a turban, the reliable standby of the actress tired of having her hair fussed over every second. I hope good Dame Helen passed this tip along to young Eliza Hope Bennett, who shows every sign of becoming an accomplished actress.
The movie now descends into the realm of your basic good guys vs. wrathful wraiths formula, with pitched battles and skullduggery. The villains are Dustfinger 
Paul Bettany
 and the ambitious Capricorn 
Andy Serkis
", and there is always the threat of Mo and Meggie being transmogrified into the pages of the book. There theyd at least have the company of the missing mom, and the shabby author Fenoglio "
Jim Broadbent
, who wrote the novel within
Inkheart,
and apparently was only set free to rise up one level, to the novel containing his novel. Thanks for nothing.
Lots of screams, horrible fates almost happening, close scrapes, cries for help, special effects, monomania, quick thinking, pluck, fear and scrambling. You know the kinds of stuff. I learn there are two more novels in this series by
Cornelia Funke
, both of which will remain just as unread by me as the first. It is hard to guess what they will involve, however, because this one closes with a curiously cobbled-together ending that seems to solve everything, possibly as a talisman against a sequel.

Love Jones 1997 Cast
Larenz Tate as Darius
Nia Long as Nina
Bill Bellamy as Hollywood
Isaiah Washington as Savon
Lisa Nicole Carson as Josie
Written and Directed by Theodore Witcher
Comedy, Drama, Indie, Romance Rated R
For Language and Sexuality 110 minutes
"Love Jones\\ is a love story set in the world of Chicago\s middle-class black artists and professionals--which is to say, it shows a world more unfamiliar to moviegoers than the far side of the moon. It is also frankly romantic and erotic and smart. This is the first movie in a while where the guy quotes Mozart, and the girl tells him he\s really thinking of Shaw.
The movie stars
Nia Long
as Nina, a professional photographer, and
Larenz Tate
as Darius, a novelist. After an opening montage of great black and white Chicago scenes Nina\s photographs, we learn, they Meet Cute at the Sanctuary, a club inspired by the various venues around town for poetry slams, cool jazz and upscale dating. His moves are smooth: He meets her, walks to the mike, and retitles his poem "A Blues for Nina,\\ reading it to her across the smoky room. She likes that. "Maybe next week you\ll write something for me,\\ he says. They engage in flirt-talk. "There are other things than sex,\\ she tells him. Like what? he wants to know. She takes a pen and writes "love\\ on his wrist.
"As their relationship develops, we see it in the context of the world they live in, a world of African-American artists, writers, teachers and intellectuals. The films writer-director,"
Theodore Witcher
, says he wanted to suggest a modern Chicago version of the Harlem Renaissance, but this is the 1920s filtered through modern eyes, and some of the parties they attend have conversation that sounds like hip campus faculty talk.
The relationship between Darius and Nina proceeds, but not smoothly. Is it just a sex thing? They talk about that. She\s on the rebound from her last man, and tells Darius "the timing is bad,\\ but it starts looking pretty good. And their chemistry, as characters and actors, is hot. There\s a sensuous scene where they go to her place, and she loads her camera and tells him to strip, and shoots him while he\s teasing her. This nicely turns the gender tables on the famous "Blow Up" scene where the photographer made love through his camera.
"Witchers screenplay is not content to move from A to B to love. There are hurt feelings and misunderstandings, and Nina goes to New York at one point to see her former finance and find out if theres still life in their relationship. I didnt buy that New York trip; it seemed clear to me that Darius was her love, and if she was merely testing him, why take a chance of losing a good thing? Darius starts seeing another woman, she starts dating his best friend, and a completely avoidable misunderstanding develops."
"I felt frustrated, but I was happy to. When movie characters inspire my affection, so that I want them to stay together when they dont, that shows the movies working. And there is a very nice sequence when they both end up at a party with other people, and see each other across the room, and are hurt."
"These two characters are charismatic. Theres electricity when they go on a date to the weekly steppersball hosted by Herb Kent the Cool Gent, who plays himself. Steppin is a Chicago dance style that comes out of jitterbug, cooled down, and as we watch this scene we get that interesting feeling when a fiction film edges toward documentary and shows us something we havent seen before."
Nia Long and Larenz Tate are destined for more starring roles. They embody qualities we associate with
Whitney Houston
and
Denzel Washington
": Theyre fresh, have a sense of humor, and are almost implausibly good-looking."
It\s hard to believe that Tate--so smooth, literate and attractive here--played the savage killer O-Dog in "
Menace II Society
." Nia Long was Brandi, one of the girl friends, in "
Boyz N the Hood
." "Love Jones\\ extends their range, to put it mildly.
Witcher has a good eye for locations. You can see Loop skyscrapers in the backgrounds of a lot of shots, so you know this is Chicago, but movies haven\t shown us these neighborhoods before. Scenes are set in Hyde Park, on the near North Side, and in between. As the characters move from coffee bars to record stores to restaurants to the Sanctuary, we realize how painfully limited the media vision of urban black life is. Why do the movies give us so many homeboys and gangstas and druggies and so few photographers, poets and teachers? The title is spelled all lower-case. That kind of typography was popular in avant garde circles from the 1920s through the 1950s, on everything from book covers to record album jackets. I think Witcher is trying to evoke the tone of that period when bohemia was still somewhat secret, when success was not measured only by sales, when fictional characters wrote novels instead of computer programs and futures contracts. There is also a bow to the unconventional in the ending of his film. Many love stories contrive to get their characters together at the end. This one contrives, not to keep them apart, but to bring them to a bittersweet awareness that is above simple love. Some audience members would probably prefer a romantic embrace in the sunset, as the music swells. But "Love Jones\\ is too smart for that.

Home Alone 1990 Cast
MacAulay Culkin as Kevin
Joe Pesci as Harry
Daniel Stern as Marv
John Heard as Peter
Roberts Blossom as Marley
"Catherine OHara" as Kate
John Candy as Gus Polinski
Directed by Chris Columbus
Written and Produced by John Hughes
Photographed by Julio Macat
Edited by Raja Gosnell
Music by John Williams
Comedy, Family, Holiday Rated PG
103 minutes "Home Alone" is a splendid movie title because it evokes all sorts of scary nostalgia. Being left home alone, when you were a kid, meant hearing strange noises and being afraid to look in the basement - but it also meant doing all the things that grownups would tell you to stop doing, if they were there. Things like staying up to watch Johnny Carson, eating all the ice cream, and sleeping in your parents\ bed.
"Home Alone" is about an 8-year-old hero who does all of those things, but unfortunately he also single-handedly stymies two house burglars by booby-trapping the house. And they\re the kinds of traps that any 8-year-old could devise, if he had a budget of tens of thousands of dollars and the assistance of a crew of movie special effects people.
"The movies screenplay is by"
John Hughes
, who sometimes shows a genius for remembering what it was like to be young. His best movies, such as "
Sixteen Candles
," "
The Breakfast Club
," "
"Ferris Buellers Day Off"
" and "
Planes, Trains and Automobiles
," find a way to be funny while still staying somewhere within the boundaries of remote plausibility. This time, he strays so far from his premise that the movie suffers.
If "Home Alone" had limited itself to the things that might possibly happen to a forgotten 8-year-old, I think I would have liked it more. What I didn\t enjoy was the subplot involving the burglars 
Joe Pesci
and
Daniel Stern
, who are immediately spotted by little Kevin Macaulay Culkin, and made the targets of his cleverness.
The movie opens in the Chicago suburbs with a houseful of people on the eve of a big family Christmas vacation in Paris. There are relatives and kids everywhere, and when the family oversleeps and has to race to the airport, Kevin is somehow overlooked in the shuffle. When he wakes up later that morning, the house is empty. So he makes the best of it.
"A real kid would probably be more frightened than this movie character, and would probably cry. He might also try calling someone, or asking a neighbor for help. But in the contrived world of this movie, the only neighbor is an old coot who is rumored to be the Snow Shovel Murderer, and the phone doesnt work. When Kevins parents discover theyve forgotten him, they find it impossible to get anyone to follow through on their panicked calls - if anyone did so, the movie would be over."
The plot is so implausible that it makes it hard for us to really care about the plight of the kid. What works in the other direction, however, and almost carries the day, is the gifted performance by young Macaulay Culkin, as Kevin. Culkin is the little boy who co-starred with
John Candy
in "
Uncle Buck
," and here he has to carry almost the whole movie. He has lots of challenging acting scenes, and he\s up to them. I\m sure he got lots of help from director
Chris Columbus
", but hes got the stuff to begin with. Hes such a confident and gifted little actor that Id like to see him in a story I could care more about."
"Home Alone" isn\t that story. When the burglars invade Kevin\s home, they find themselves running a gamut of booby traps so elaborate they could have been concocted by Rube Goldberg - or by the berserk father in "
Last House on the Left
." Because all plausibility is gone, we sit back, detached, to watch stunt men and special effects guys take over a movie that promised to be the kind of story audiences could identify with.

"Jon Josts Frameup 1995" Cast
Nancy Carlin as Beth Ann
Howard Swain as Ricky Lee
Written, Directed, Photographed and Edited by Jon Jost
Rated NR Frontal Nudity
88 minutes I have received a good deal of mail from readers concerned that movies like "
Pulp Fiction
" will inspire young viewers to shoot one another. I don\t believe movies are that influential, but if they are, then I hope that potential drifting aimless alienated teenage killers will make it a point to catch "Jon Jost\s Frameup," which will show them just how banal the whole business is.
Here is a movie like "
Badlands
," "Guncrazy" or "
Natural Born Killers
," but deliberately drained of energy. Instead of romanticizing his young killers on the road, Jost displays them as boring, stupid airheads.
The movie tells the story of an ex-con named Ricky Lee and a waitress named Beth Ann whom he picks up with three words of smooth talk "Dump the job". She walks out of the diner where she works, and that night, in her words, they "make like bunnies" in a cheap motel room before hitting the road in a stolen pickup truck.
Her first notion that life will not be easy comes as she asks, "What happened to your red Camaro?" Beth Ann, played by
Nancy Carlin
, talks like a zombie with an annoying, whiny, high-pitched monotone. She says things like, "The school counselor convinced me it didn\t make sense to kill myself just yet." She remembers that she dated a high school football hero for "six months and 12 days," until he dumped her for a girl with bigger breasts. She likes sex because it is all she knows.
Ricky Lee is like a failed version of the character
Ethan Hawke
plays in "
Reality Bites
." As a child, he set cats on fire. Now he\s the kind of guy who keeps his dark glasses on during sex. Together, the two of them drive around the Pacific Northwest aimlessly, making like lots of bunnies, until he offers her paradise, which is, in her mind, California.
They recite a litany of their dreams: "Disneyland, Knotts Berry Farm, redwoods, Yosemite, Palm Springs." And they realize some of them, finding an apparently real road sign advertising a "Drive-Thru Tree." Then Ricky Lee sticks up a grocery and kills some people, and they are tried, convicted and sentenced to death by lethal injection.
A narrator reads the chemical details of the injection.
If they ever telecast an actual execution, it will no doubt look something like the two that Jost shows, in split screen, with Ricky Lee cursing and Beth Ann whining, "Do you really have to do this?" There is a shot after her death, in which she whines a little less, having at last found something fairly interesting.
Jon Jost
has been making films since 1974, mostly on small budgets, although his "All the Vermeers in New York" 1990 cost $250,000, a lot for him. His independence gives him the freedom to deny convention: He feels no need to make Ricky Lee and Beth Ann charismatic, attractive or even interesting. They are people who have never developed a vocabulary for their thoughts and desires, and so it is almost touching when she reads aloud from a sleazy romance novel: For her, these pages are mind-expanding.
Jost is doing a revisionist version of all those earlier movies involving a boy, a girl, the road and a murder spree. Such films traditionally provide their subjects with a certain elan. In Jost\s vision, they steal and kill because they are just too dumb to support themselves any other way. Another character pictures them with Day-Glo signs on their foreheads, flashing the word "loser." "Frameup" is not terrifically entertaining because it shows boring people doing stupid things. It is not for inexperienced filmgoers. But if you\ve seen a lot of movies and know the difference between a boring movie and a movie about boring people, you may sort of like it in a curious way, like I did.

Joyful Noise 2012 Cast
Queen Latifah as Vi Rose Hill
Dolly Parton as G.G. Sparrow
Keke Palmer as Olivia Hill
Jeremy Jordan as Randy Garrity
Dexter Darden as Walter Hill
Courtney B. Vance as Pastor Dale
Jesse L. Martin as Marcus Hill
Written and directed by Todd Graff
Comedy, Music Rated PG-13
for some language including a sexual reference 117 minutes
"Joyful Noise" is an ungainly assembly of parts that don\t fit, and the strange thing is that it makes no particular effort to please its target audience, which would seem to be lovers of gospel choirs. There\s a scene toward the end set at a national gospel music competition that features a real gospel choir, and compared to them, our team seems like a hasty gathering of unmatched character types. Here are people we don\t believe, with dialogue that sounds contrived and unconvincing.
The place: a Georgia town, deep in poverty. The characters: the Pacashau Sacred Divinity Choir. The occasion: Just as the choir leader dies of a heart attack, the annual gospel choir competition is approaching. Two strong women are in competition for the job of choir director. Vi Rose Hill 
Queen Latifah
 and G.G. Sparrow 
Dolly Parton
. Pastor Dale 
Courtney B. Vance
 gives Vi Rose the position, although G.G. is the widow of the former director and believes she should have inherited the honor.
"Now pause a moment. Imagine a choir. Not a large choir, but smallish, with most of its members looking typecast. Its a small church, but has plenty of empty seats during services. Cutting corners on extras? It is completely racially integrated, which I believe is not that common even in modern Georgia. The film has almost no specifically spiritual content; the purpose of the choir is not to praise God but to win contests. The choir members date a lot, leading to a scene in which a black woman and an Asian man fall in love and sleep together. This is without the benefit of matrimony, although it must be admitted that the man seems to be quickly punished by the Almighty. Later in the film, the woman meets another Asian man, and they exchange warm smiles as part of the clunky happy ending."
Dolly Parton and Queen Latifah, let it be said, are too much for one choir. They provide an excess of subplots. The Parton character has a grandson named Randy 
Jeremy Jordan
, who has been sent to stay with her after "getting in trouble" in New York. The Latifah character has a daughter, Olivia 
Keke Palmer
. Randy and Olivia fall instantly in love. Olivia is 16. Randy is a "teenager" who looks every bit as old as the actor, who is 26 and poised to play Clyde in a Broadway production of "
Bonnie and Clyde
." He and others were perhaps chosen by a casting director without a single thought about whether they seemed to belong in the same movie.
"Its unclear why G.G. and Vi Rose hate each other or what their history has been, but man, they have a grudge. The appointment of Vi Rose as choir director eventually leads to an epic confrontation between the two women in the local restaurant where G.G. is a waitress. This has to be seen to be believed. While the customers look on in disbelief, and the owner takes an amazingly long time to intervene, they scream insults at each other, and Vi Rose throws baking powder biscuits at G.G., who blocks them with her waitress tray."
A great many of the insults involve G.G.\s plastic surgery, which Vi Rose implies is mostly responsible for the G.G. standing before us today. G.G. shouts back, "Plastic surgeons have to make a living!" We all know that Dolly Parton has had some work, and that she often jokes about it. Still, Vi Rose\s dialogue seems over the top: too cruel, because it contains much truth. There is another problem. One look at G.G. and you suspect no waitress in a poverty-stricken town could afford work like that.
The two "kids," Olivia and Randy, develop a relationship that ticks off the time-honored cliches of all such movie romances, including the breakup and the reconciliation. The movie loads on another subplot involving Vi Rose\s son, Walter 
Dexter Darden
", who has Aspergers syndrome and is articulate about it, complaining to his mom that he wishes he knew how to behave better socially and knows what people mean when they say things. Happily, he finds an appropriate way to express himself during the national finals, and fits snugly into the collective happy ending."
True gospel music can indeed be a joyful noise. Turning to the 95th Psalm, the writer of this film,
Todd Graff
, who also directed, seems to have read it this way: "O come, let us sing unto the Lord; let us make a joyful noise to the rock and roll of our salvation." The climactic scene at the national finals is so inappropriate, so unexpected in terms of what\s gone before, that its purpose is not so much to win the competition as to supply the audience with a big production number starring Dolly and the Queen. The only thing miraculous about it is that a big orchestra materializes on the soundtrack. In trying so awkwardly to include a little something for everyone, "Joyful Noise" succeeds in finding a little something to disappoint everyone, no matter what they were expecting.

Chicken with Plums 2012 Cast
Mathieu Amalric as Nasser Ali
Maria de Medeiros as Faringuisse
Edouard Baer as Azrael
Golshifteh Farahani as Irane
Isabella Rossellini as Parvine
Directed by Marjane Satrapi
Vincent Paronnaud Written by
Satrapi Paronnaud
Comedy, Drama, Foreign Rated PG-13
for some drug content, violent images, sensuality and smoking 93 minutes
"Chicken With Plums" is a grand, romantic life story about love, loss, regret and the sadness that can be evoked by a violin — not only through music, but through the instrument itself. It is all melancholy and loss, and delightfully comedic, with enough but not too much magic realism. The story as it stands could be the scenario for an opera.
The film begins in Tehran in 1958, when the shah ruled a secular Iran not yet stilted by Islamic fundamentalism. Little is made of politics in the film, and still less of religion; it is all told through the soulful eyes of a master violinist named Nasser Ali, played by the familiar French actor
Mathieu Amalric
; as you may recall, they were expressive enough to carry his whole performance in "
The Diving Bell and the Butterfly
." Freely moving between past and present, the film paints his middle-class Persian family as he develops into a mediocre violinist, meets and loses the great love of his life, and transforms his pain into greatness.
"Chicken With Plums" was shot on soundstages in Berlin, creating an intimate Tehran that is sometimes enhanced by animation and by several clouds of smoke, one that a savant tells Nasser Ali contains the soul of his mother 
Isabella Rossellini
. The extraordinary cast also includes
Maria de Medeiros
as Faringuisse, the wife his family made him marry;
Golshifteh Farahani
"as Irane, the clockmakers daughter who is the love of his life;"
Edouard Baer
as Azrael, the Angel of Death who is the narrator, and
Chiara Mastroianni
"as Lili, Nasser Alis daughter as an adult."
"An unashamedly romantic score by Olivier Bernet deepens the films emotions, as Nasser Ali briefly feels the ecstasy of love and then descends into a lifelong depression that leads to him going to bed and deciding to die. We see some of the events that led him to this extreme, but the film has no bad people, except for Iranes father Serge Avedikiane, who angrily denies the violinist the hand of his daughter. How could she reject him? How can she tell him, 20 years later, that she has no memory of him? A closing scene is hopelessly sad. Nasser Alis wife also shares the blame for breaking the treasured violin her husband was given by his master "
Didier Flamand
. She begins as a screeching harridan and later reveals the touching depths of her own love, expressed when she prepares his favorite dish, chicken with plums, and brings it to him on his deathbed.
The co-directors and writers are
Marjane Satrapi
and
Vincent Paronnaud
, whose film of her autobiographical graphic novel "
Persepolis
" was nominated for a 2008 Academy Award. Working here in live action with an adaptation of another of her graphic novels, they give themselves more stylistic freedom than even animation allows. One of the film\s particular strengths is its portrait of an Iran that sheltered invaluable little shops and expressive old savants, and had not yet been dragged into the future — or the past, you decide.

Maid to Order 1987 Cast
Ally Sheedy as Jessie Montgomery
"Beverly DAngelo" as Stella
Michael Ontkean as Nick McGuire
Valerie Perrine as Georgette Starkey
Dick Shawn as Stan Starkey
Tom Skerritt as Charles Montgomery
Merry Clayton as Audrey James
Begona Plaza as Maria
Rainbow Phoenix as Brie Starkey
Leland Crooke as Dude
Directed by Amy Jones
Produced by Herb Jaffe
Mort Engelberg Screenplay by
Jones Perry Howze
Randy Howze Photographed by
Shelly Johnson Edited by
Sidney Wolinsky Music by
Georges Delerue Comedy, Drama, Fantasy, Romance, Science Fiction
Rated PG 93 minutes
"Maid to Order" is the sort of kindhearted social comedy they might have made in the \30s, showing what life is like on the other side of the tracks. It even uses a gimmick that hasn\t been seen for a few decades, not in movies for grown-ups, anyway: a fairy godmother, who waves her magic wand and turns a spoiled rich brat into an unemployed and starving teenage kid who has a few lessons to learn.
The brat is played by
Ally Sheedy
"as the kind of self-centered ego-burger who tells lies to get money out of her old man and never stops to think that shes letting him down. She has a lot of wishes, and he fulfills most of them, but one day she makes the wrong wish and her fairy godmother fills it all too well."
"She comes to on a Los Angeles street, still wearing an expensive party dress. Shes not sure what happened. She goes to all the usual places and nobody recognizes her. At home, the maid turns her away and her father walks right past her without a glimmer of recognition. Shes on the streets and needs a job. She finally gets one as the maid of a rock n roll promoter and his wife."
This couple, played by
Valerie Perrine
and the late
Dick Shawn
", are the highlight of the movie. Theyre the kind of people"
Mel Brooks
was thinking about when he spoke of "rising below vulgarity." They\re simpleminded and silly, ridiculously in love with material possessions and even more in love with each other. And just as well: There\s probably no one else in the world who would find them compatible.
"In the kitchen, Sheedy sweats and complains and learns a few of the ropes from the black cook and the Latino maid. They dont know what to make of her but they take pity, and there are some moments of heartfelt confession when Sheedy realizes she has been a bitch all of her life."
You can just about phone in the script for the rest of the picture, especially after the fairy godmother 
"Beverly DAngelo"
" and Sheedys father "
Tom Skeritt
 start dating. But then predictability is supposed to be one of the joys of this kind of movie.
"Unfortunately, I found it too easy to anticipate most of the big moments and too hard to believe that Sheedy was really a spoiled, mean-spirited rich bitch. She simply exudes too much good feeling. To paraphrase a famous statement by Jack Warner: Beverly DAngelo for rich bitch, and Ally Sheedy for fairy godmother."

The Road To El Dorado 2000 Cast
Kenneth Branagh as Miguel voice
Rosie Perez as Chel voice
Armand Assante as Tzekel-Kan voice
Edward James Olmos as The Chief voice
Elton John as Narrator voice
Directed by Eric Bergeron
Directed by Don Paul
Written by Ted Elliott
Terry Rossio Adventure, Animation, Comedy, Family
Rated PG For Mild Thematic Material and Language
83 minutes There is a moment in "The Road to El Dorado" where the two heroes and their profoundly dubious horse are in a rowboat somewhere in the ocean off Central America. It looks like the end. Then a seabird appears, circles and lands on their boat. This is a good omen. Land must be near. Then the bird drops dead. Bad sign. Then a shark leaps out of the sea and snaps up the bird in one gulp. Piling gag on top of gag is the strategy of the film, a bright and zesty animated comedy from DreamWorks.
In the studio\s quest to compete with Disney in the feature-length animation sweepstakes, it\s a worthy entry. It\s not as quirky as "
Antz
" or as grown up as "
The Prince Of Egypt
" but as silly fun it does nicely, and no wonder: Its directors are Disney veterans, and the soundtrack includes such effective cartoon voices as
Kevin Kline
,
Kenneth Branagh
,
Armand Assante
,
Edward James Olmos
and the unsinkable
Rosie Perez
.
"As the movie opens, the heroes, Tulio Kline and Miguel Branagh, are gambling in a waterfront dive in Spain, 1519. They win a map to the treasures of El Dorado, before its discovered that their dice are loaded and they beat a hasty retreat--pretending to duel with one another to confuse their pursuers. One thing leads to another, and they find themselves on board Hernando Cortes ship as the explorer sails for South America. Theyre discovered, sentenced to flogging and enslavement, and escape with their horse Altivo in a rowboat, which brings us to the bird, the shark, and landfall at a point that corresponds exactly with the treasure map."
"The Road to El Dorado" doesn\t have a hero; it\s about supporting characters. In other hands, the story might have centered on Cortes, whose ship catches up to Tulio and Miguel in the new land. But this is the story of two pals caught up in events beyond their comprehension, after the roly-poly local chief voice of Edward James Olmos mistakes them for gods. The plot then recycles Rudyard Kipling\s "
The Man Who Would Be King
": One likes being a god, the other doesn\t. Along the way they get a sidekick of their own, Chel, a local woman. She\s voiced by Perez, and looks like her, too. She learns their secret--they aren\t gods, only men, but likes them anyway, and decides she wants in on the team when the priest Armand Assante devises a monster to destroy them.
The movie has songs by
Elton John
and
Tim Rice
", which may grow on me, but havent yet, and some funny comedy sequences. The best may be the invention of the game of basketball, with a living ball--a round little creature who contributes his own moves to the game. More comedy comes as the friends realize the game is up, and try to sneak away with some gold of their own."
Freed of a towering central figure like Pocahontas or Tarzan, "The Road to El Dorado" is liberated for goofiness. There are no serious themes lurking about, or uplifting lessons to learn--just a couple of con men in over their heads, their gal pal and a horse that some of the time is smarter than the other three put together. Since the horse doesn\t speak, it\s able to exploit the miming gifts of the animators. This is not a landmark in the history of feature animation, but it\s bright and has good energy, and the kinds of witty asides that entertain the adults in between the margins of the stuff for the kids.

The Flamingo Kid 1984 Comedy, Drama, Family, Romance
Rated PG-13 100 minutes
"When I was eighteen, my father was ignorant on a great many subjects,"
Mark Twain
once said, "but by the time I was twenty-five, it was amazing the things the old man had learned." Here is a movie that condenses that process into one summer. The summer begins with a kid from a poor Brooklyn neighborhood taking a job as a cabana boy at a posh beach club out on Long Island. That\s against the advice of his father, a plumber, who wants his son to get a job where he can learn about hard work. By the middle of the summer, the kid has started to idolize a flashy car dealer who\s the champion of the gin rummy tables. By Labor Day, he has found out more about the car dealer than he wanted to know. And he has come to love and understand his father in a new way.
"The Flamingo Kid" stars
Matt Dillon
as the teenager,
Hector Elizondo
as his father, and
Richard Crenna
as the car dealer. There are other characters -- in particular, a bikinied goddess who helps sell Matt on life at the beach -- but these are the three characters who stand at the heart of the story. Elizondo is a hard-working man who still remembers how to dream, but knows that life has few openings for dreamers. In some of the movie\s most poetic passages, he reveals a lifelong obsession with ships, and the ways of harbor pilots. Crenna, on the other hand, is a man who firmly believes "You are what you wear," and values his status as the club\s gin rummy champion as if it really meant something.
Dillon is a revelation in this movie. Perhaps because of his name, Matt Dillon has risked being confused with your average teenage idol, the kind the pimple magazines put on their covers. Yet he has been an extraordinarily sensitive actor ever since his first appearance, in the unsung 1977 movie about alienated teenagers, "
Over the Edge
." In two movies based on novels by S.E. Hinton, "
Tex
" and "
Rumble Fish
," he had the kind of clarity, the uncluttered relationship with the camera, that you see in only a handful of actors: He was a natural. He is here, too. His role in "The Flamingo Kid" could easily have been turned into an anthology of twitches and psychic anguish as he wrestles with the meaning of life. But Dillon has the kind of acting intelligence that allows him to play each scene for no more than that particular scene is really about; he\s not trying to summarize the message in every speech. That gives him an ease, an ability to play the teenage hero as if every day were a whole summer long.
We fall into the rhythm of the beach club. Into the sunny days where all the members have lots of time to know and envy each other, and time is so plentiful that it can take hours for a nasty rumor to sweep through the cabanas. Dillon hurries from one member to another with drinks, towels, club sandwiches, messages. He feels acutely that he does not belong at this level of society -- and when Richard Crenna takes notice of him, and even more when Crenna\s daughter invites him home for dinner, Dillon feels that he\s cutting loose from the boring life back in Brooklyn. But this will be a summer of learning, and by autumn he will have learned how wise and loving his own father is, and how easy it is to be deceived by surfaces. Along the way to that lesson, "The Flamingo Kid" has a lot of fun I hope I haven\t made this social comedy sound dreary, and at the end it has a surprisingly emotional impact.

Cold Turkey 1971 Cast
Dick Van Dyke as The Rev. Clayton Brooks
Pippa Scott as Natalie Brooks
Tom Poston as Mrs. Stopworth
Edward Everett Horton as Hiram C. Grayson
Bob and Ray as TV Personalities
Bob Newhart as Merwin Wren
Directed and produced by Norman Lear
Photographed by Charles F. Wheeler
Music by Randy Newman
Comedy Rated PG
99 minutes "I was musing the other day that there arent enough fat men in movies, and especially not enough mean fat men filled with malice and avarice. Too many movie fat men are jolly these days, and we dont have the Sidney Greenstreets with ice in their eyes."
"Which set me to thinking that, fat men aside, we dont have enough malice and avarice in the movies these days, either. Movies are getting to be too damn nice. Especially comedies. If theres anything I cant stand, its a heart-warming comedy, filled with warmth and sunshine and happy endings, in which the essential goodness of human nature, etc., is demonstrated in the end."
"No. What we need are mean comedies, filled with mean and petty people who hate and envy each other, and exhibit the basest of human motives. Comedies like that canonized W. C. Fields, and it was Groucho Marxs fundamental hatefulness that made his stuff so much more than slapstick. Lately, though, the movie comedy has fallen on hard times in America. Until the last couple of weeks."
Now there are two new comedies that I can recommend to cynics and malcontents with little fear they\ll be disappointed: "
A New Leaf
," reviewed last week, and Norman Lear\s "Cold Turkey." Both of them assume as a matter of course that the human being is powered with unworthy motives, especially greed. "A New Leaf" gets a little sentimental at the end, but not too much, and "Cold Turkey" ends with the scoundrels being shot by their own cigarette lighter.
"The movie, as everybody knows by now, concerns an attempt by a small town in Iowa to qualify for a $25 million award by signing all its citizens to a 30-day no smoking pledge. That somehow doesnt sound like the worlds greatest idea for a comedy, but Lear makes it work by a brilliant masterstroke: He gets the comedy, not out of people trying to stop smoking, but out of the people themselves. So instead of lots of scenes of characters sneaking puffs, you have them preening their vanity as national television crews descend upon the town. For, of course, Eagle Rock, Iowa, has become famous overnight."
"The television personalities are all played by Bob and Ray, who do a ruthless job on Walter Chronic, David Chetley and others, confirming as Ive always suspected that the CBS Evening News is itself a send-up of Bob and Rays pioneering Wally Ballou. President Nixon tries to force his way into Eagle Rock, to share the limelight, and various folks like Spiro Agnew turn up, too."
The townsfolk love it, especially
Dick Van Dyke
as an ambitious minister who sleeps with hair-curlers and dreams of being transferred to a rich congregation in Dearborn, Mich. We meet the minister, the mayor, the town drunk and a little old lady in tennis shoes whose favorite word contains eight letters the least of which are \bull,\ during a series of vignettes handled by Lear with an unfailing eye for human frailty. Even if you don\t smoke, you\ll find "Cold Turkey" funny. You\re greedy, aren\t you?

The Road To Wellville 1994 Cast
Anthony Hopkins as Dr. J. H. Kellogg
Bridget Fonda as Eleanor Lightbody
Matthew Broderick as Will Lightbody
John Cusack as Charles Ossining
Directed by Alan Parker
Comedy, Musical, Romance Rated R
Nudity, Vulgar Language, Scatalogical References 120 minutes
There can be found in the back pages of various health magazines a small advertisement for colonic irrigation. It is illustrated with a drawing of what looks like several tons of lava bursting forth from the earth\s core. I have never mailed away for the booklet offered, and now that I\ve seen "The Road to Wellville," I don\t think I need to. The movie is like an expedition through the digestive tract with gun and camera.
It tells the story of an extraordinary period in the history of Battle Creek, Mich. "Cereal Bowl to the Nation", when the town was the center of a boom in corn flakes and other aids to proper nutrition and irrigation. Battle Creek was to flakes as the Yukon was to gold, and towering above the other local reformers was the remarkable Dr. John Harvey Kellogg, inventor of the corn flake, peanut butter and various medieval instruments to scrub the body inside and out. To give you an idea of the doctor\s greatness, it was his younger brother W.K., a $6-a-week hireling, who went on to found the cereal kingdom. "The Road to Wellville," written and directed by
Alan Parker
from T. Coraghessan Boyle\s novel, is a hymn to American cults of hygiene, nutrition and cleanliness. Such groups have historically flourished in Southwest Michigan, where as a youth I once was taken to the House of David, watched their long-bearded baseball team, and ordered from a vegetarian menu in which all the meat-words were in quotation marks - the word "turkey" indicating that the active ingredient, while impressively turkeyoid in appearance, had a closer kinship to the oat or the bean.
"Today I am essentially a vegetarian, so the jokes on me."
And Parker has no doubt it is a joke. While it is certainly much healthier for anyone to eat no meat and take no alcohol, caffeine or tobacco, "The Road to Wellville" uses those notions as mere stepping-stones to greater and goofier reforms. Kellogg, played grandiloquently by
Anthony Hopkins
as a bucktoothed little drum-beater, condenses his beliefs into little sayings: The tongue is the billboard of the bowels. We are but lifeguards on the shores of the alimentary canal. An erection is a flagpole on your grave. As the movie opens, we see him demonstrating that under a microscope, pig droppings cannot be distinguished from a porterhouse.
"The movie tells the story of several pilgrims drawn to Battle Creek by Dr. Kelloggs famed Sanitarium not to be confused with a sanitorium, to take the cure and have pounds of toxic sludge blasted from their intestines. Eleanor and Will Lightbody "
Bridget Fonda
and
Matthew Broderick
" arrive, she for the third time, he for the first, and are immediately given separate quarters, although Wills enforced celibacy seems less cru el when he meets the cheerful Nurse Graves "
Traci Lind
. Among the other patients are Ina Munta 
Lara Flynn Boyle
, who is slowly turning green, and Mr. Unpronounceable Alexander Slanksnis, a Russian with an awesome gas problem.
Arriving in town at about the same time, a young man on the make named Charles 
John Cusack
 teams up with the unscrupulous Goodloe Bender 
Michael Lerner
 in a dubious scheme to manufacture corn flakes. And young George Kellogg 
Dana Carvey
", one of J.H.s 42 adopted children, turns up as a beggar at the feast."
The movie is quite jolly in its preoccupation with digestion and the processes which precede and follow it. Kellogg subjects his patients to strange and sometimes fatal hydroelectrical treatments, and the "San" attracts other weirdos, including German sex therapists with pioneering massage techniques and odd battery-powered genital treatments. All of these practices are followed with hilarious solemnity.
I am not sure "The Road to Wellville" will be enjoyed by everybody. Oddly enough, it may be the very people the satire is aimed at who will enjoy it the most. If you, like me, have wandered hypnotized down the aisles of health food stores, entranced by products like TVP, Gardenburgers, soy milk, barbecued tofu and the ominous Slimming Tea - and if you, like me, have lingered over the shopping networks as they advertise gadgets that will give you a new body in three weeks of six minutes a day - you\ll probably like this film. If not, then all I can say is, you are probably carrying around a bucket of toxic sludge, and welcome to it.

Hearts in Atlantis 2001 Cast
Anthony Hopkins as Brautigan
Anton Yelchin as Bobby Garfield
Hope Davis as Liz Garfield
Mika Boorem as Carol Gerber
Directed by Scott Hicks
Written by William Goldman
Based On The Book by Stephen King
Drama, Mystery, Thriller Rated PG-13
For Violence and Thematic Scenes 101 minutes
"Hearts in Atlantis" weaves a strange spell, made of nostalgia and fear. Rarely does a movie make you feel so warm and so uneasy at the same time, as Stephen King\s story evokes the mystery of adolescence, when everything seems to be happening for the very first time.
Set in 1960, the movie tells the story of an 11-year-old named Bobby 
Anton Yelchin
 whose father died when he was 5, whose mother 
Hope Davis
 seems too distracted to love him, whose life centers on his best friend Sully Will Rothhaar, and Carol Gerber 
Mika Boorem
, with whom he will share a first kiss by which he will judge all the others. As is often the case in King stories, the period is recreated through an intense memory of cars, radio shows, clothes, baseball mitts--material treasures in an uncertain world.
"Then a man comes as a boarder in the upstairs apartment at Bobbys house. This is Ted Brautigan "
Anthony Hopkins
. "I never trust a man who carries his possessions in grocery bags," says Bobby\s mother, as Ted stands on the curb without much in the way of possessions. Bobby is often home alone his mother is much distracted by her office job, and Ted offers root beer, conversation, and even a dollar a week to read him the paper. Then he reveals a more shadowy assignment for Bobby: Keeping a lookout for Low Men, who are seeking Ted because they want to use his gift.
By now Bobby does not have to be told that Ted can sometimes foresee the future; Bobby has the same ability, but muted. "One feels them first at the back of one\s eyes," Ted tells Bobby, and we note how Hopkins takes this line, which could come from a cheap horror film, and invests it with nuance.
"The Low Men themselves are as symbolic as real. In the King story its hinted they may come from another world or time, and in the movie they may be FBI agents who want to use Teds powers for the government, but it hardly matters; in either version, they are the hard realities of an adult world that takes the gifted and the unconforming and either uses them or destroys them."
Scott Hicks
and Piotr Sobocinski, who directed and photographed the movie, have wisely seen that atmosphere is everything in "Hearts of Atlantis." They evoke a shady lower-middle class neighborhood in a town of hills and trees, and evoke the sleepy Sunday 1950s feel of the newspaper, root beer, Chesterfields, and a game on the radio.
"In this world, Bobby grows up. He is threatened by an older neighborhood bully, he is in love with Carol Gerber, he is in awe of Ted. When Bobbys mother gives him an adult library card for his birthday, it is Ted who advises him which authors bear reading."
There are wonderful set pieces in the film. One of the best is the way Ted tells Bobby for story of the great Chicago Bears running back Bronco Nagurski, who came out of retirement, old and hurt, and seemed to carry the whole Chicago Cardinals team on his back as he marched down the field in a last hurrah. Another is a visit to a pool hall in a neighboring town, where Ted wants to place a bet, and Bobby meets a woman who knew his father.
"The movie ends as childhood ends, in disillusionment at the real world that lies ahead. Bobbys mother is cruelly divested of her illusions, and later lashes out at the innocent Ted, and then the Low Men come, as they always do. But Bobbys summer had to end, and at least he experienced the best of all possible kisses."
"A movie like this is kind of a conjuring act. Like a lot of Stephen Kings recent work, it is not a horror story so much as an everyday story with horror lurking in the margins. Its not a genre movie, in other words, but the story of characters we believe in and care about. Anton Yelchin is not just a cute kid but a smart and wary one, and Mika Boorem is not just the girl down the street but the kind of soul who inspires the best in others. And Anthony Hopkins finds just the tired, truthful note for Ted Brautigan--who knows the worst about men and fears for his future, but still has enough faith to believe it will do a kid good to read the right books."
"So, should you therefore read the book after seeing the movie? I would recommend the audiobook; William Hurts reading is one of the best audio performances I have ever heard."

Bolweiser 1983 Cast
Kurt Raab as Bolweiser
Elizabeth Trissenaar as Hanni
Written and directed by Rainer Werner Fassbinder
Based on the novel by Oskar Maria Graf
When
Rainer Werner Fassbinder
is good, he is very, very good. And when he is bad, he makes "Bolweiser." The current brochure for the Varsity and Parkway theaters describes this 1977 film as "an excellent addition to the Fassbinder library," and that\s where it belongs, in the collection of anyone determined to see all of the late German director\s 37 or 38 features.
I must confess I am one of those people. I\ve been fascinated with Fassbinder since I saw his first films in the Chicago Film Festival in the early 1970s. Since he was the most inexhaustibly prolific of filmmakers, there were always two or three new Fassbinders to see every year and if a few titles like "Bolweiser" slipped through the net, it was no great matter: In 1977 alone, his other work included "Satan\s Brew," "Despair" and "Gods of the Plague."
The next year he made his breakthrough to a wider audience with "
The Marriage of Maria Braun
." "Bolweiser" was made for West German television, as were several of his films. Sometimes when I have nothing better to do, I fantasize about what would happen if 10 or 12 of Fassbinder\s films played in prime time on American television. It\s fascinating until I reflect on how bizarre, in its own way, American prime time must seem to the literates of other countries.
"Bolweiser" is not about literates. It\s about a stupid provincial stationmaster and his nymphomaniac wife, and about assorted other citizens in a town where everybody behaves like eighth-graders. This is the first movie I\ve seen, by Fassbinder or anyone else except
Jerry Lewis
, in which the adult characters pout, scream, cry, fib and clam up like kids. They also spend a lot of time in passionate embraces, which seem scarcely more mature.
This full-length movie would be over in 15 minutes if the stationmaster were not so incredibly slow to realize that his wife is having an affair with the village butcher. The stationmaster is also a chump. When local gossips talk about the notorious affair, he allows himself to be talked into actually suing them. Then he perjures himself, with pathetic results.
I realize that the point of "Bolweiser" is to be found in qualities apart from its plot. Indeed, to discuss this plot seriously is probably a miscalculation. The movie is all style: Great swooping zooms, romantic dissolves, self-pitying histrionics and blubbering protestations. "Bolweiser" has been described by Andrew Sarris as one of the most beautiful films ever made, and by other New York critics as the distillation of Fassbinder\s genius.
That\s unfair to Fassbinder. He made a lot of good films. He made a lot of bad films that were interesting. "Bolweiser" is one of his few films that are interesting only because they are bad.

Intolerable Cruelty 2003 Cast
George Clooney as Miles Massey
Catherine Zeta-Jones as Marylin Rexroth
Geoffrey Rush as Donovan Donaly
Cedric The Entertainer as Gus Petch
Edward Herrmann as Rex Rexroth
Billy Bob Thornton as Howard
Richard Jenkins as Freddy Bender
Written by Joel Coen
Robert Ramsey Matthew Stone
Ethan Coen Based On A Story by
Ramsey Comedy, Romance
Rated PG-13 For Sexual Content, Language and Brief Violence
100 minutes The camera just stands there and gawks at
Catherine Zeta-Jones
, and so does
George Clooney
, and so do we. She goes on the list with
Ava Gardner
and
Deborah Kerr
. It\s not a long list. She has the kind of beauty that could melt a divorce lawyer\s heart and soften his brain, which is what happens in "Intolerable Cruelty," the new comedy by the Coen Brothers.
Clooney plays Miles Massey, the millionaire author of the Massey Pre-Nup, a prenuptial agreement so tightly written that it has, we learn, never been cracked. "They spend an entire semester on it at Harvard Law." We meet him in divorce court, representing an outraged husband 
Geoffrey Rush
" who surprised his wife with the pool man and found that odd, since they didnt have a pool."
Massey is hired by Rex Rexroth 
Edward Herrmann
", who has been briefly married to Marylin Zeta-Jones. She has a video, taken by her detective Gus Cedric the Entertainer exposing Rex as a cheater, and wants to win his millions in the settlement. Miles wins the case, so its curious that Marylin wants to hire him to draft a Massey Pre-Nup for her next marriage, which will be to a gulping, blushing Texas oil billionaire named Howard "
Billy Bob Thornton
in full display.
"Miles, who is already gob-smacked with Marylins bewitching sex appeal, cant understand why she wants to marry a yahoo like Howard. Or, actually, he can: She wants Howards money. In that case, why does she want the Massey Pre-Nup? To prove she really loves him, she says. Since she really doesnt, Miles can only look on in wonderment and admiration. Hes fascinated by the brilliance with which she violates conventional morality."
The Coens
"start with nothing but ducks in this movie, and for a long time it looks like theyre all in a row. Clooney and Zeta-Jones are both great-looking people, both smart, both able to play comedy, both able to handle the kind of dialogue fondly described in our nations literate past as witty repartee. Both characters are sharks, but both are human, too, and their mutual sexual attraction is so palpable you could cook with it. Miles is moved with the profound admiration only one slickster can have for another; when Marylin actually inspires Howard to eat the uncrackable Massey Pre-Nup with barbecue sauce, Miles realizes he is witnessing not just beauty and genius, but a will to challenge his own."
Plots like this have fueled lovely screwball comedies, and "Intolerable Cruelty" is in the genre, but somehow not of it. The Coens sometimes have a way of standing to one side of their work: It\s the puppet and they\re the ventriloquists. The puppet is sincere, but the puppetmaster is wagging his eyebrows at the audience and asking, can you believe this stuff? Joel and Ethan are bounteously gifted filmmakers, but sometimes you just want them to lay off the irony and climb down here with the groundlings. Their "
Fargo
" was a movie that loved its characters, and it\s one of the best movies I\ve ever seen.
It is hard to show the Coens\ distancing process at work without revealing the movie\s secrets, but let me try. The film is told from Massey\s point of view. There is something that he wants: Marylin. He desires her so badly that in order to get her, he would balance the Massey Pre-Nup on his own head and crack it himself, with a hammer. We sympathize with this desire, because we share it. We want him to win her. The question is, does she want him? Of course she wants his money; that goes with the territory. But does she want to marry a millionaire, or simply become one herself? I was reminded of Lubitsch\s great "
Trouble in Paradise
," which is about a con man, a con woman who loves him but can\t afford him, and a rich widow who thinks she can buy him but would be happy enough to rent him for the season. By the end of that movie, everyone knows all about each other, and they accept the situation; if we cannot have what we want, they agree, let us at least be able to admire the way we behaved.
Miles and Marylin acknowledge their mutual chicanery. Neither one is very nice. But, aw, come on, when she walks across the room and his heart leaps up, or when she looks at him in a closeup that undresses itself, what makes the Coens pull back from this emotion? Why won\t they give us the payoff their setup demands? We enjoy many turns of the screw in this movie, but there comes a time when the screw is seated and they keep turning until they strip the groove. We, poor saps, who invested our emotions in the movie, are hung out to dry. The materials are available in "Intolerable Cruelty" to create a movie with an irresistible comic payload, so why must they skew it into a warning against itself? That said: The movie has many scenes of delicious comedy, Cloo-ney and Zeta-Jones play their characters perfectly in an imperfect screenplay, and the man with the asthma puffer gets the biggest single laugh since the hair gel in "
"Theres Something About Mary"
."

Across the Universe 2007 Cast
Jim Sturgess as Jude
Joe Anderson as Max
Dana Fuchs as Sadie
T.V. Carpio as Prudence
Bono as Dr. Robert
Eddie Izzard as Mr. Kite
Martin Luther McCoy as Jo-Jo
Directed by Julie Taymor
Written by Dick Clement
Ian La Frenais Adventure, Drama, Music, Romance
Rated PG-13 for some drug content, nudity, sexuality, violence and language
133 minutes Here is a bold, beautiful, visually enchanting musical where we walk
into
the theater humming the songs.
Julie Taymor
\s "Across the Universe" is an audacious marriage of cutting-edge visual techniques, heart-warming performances, 1960s history and the Beatles songbook. Sounds like a concept that might be behind its time, but I believe in yesterday.
This isn\t one of those druggy 1960s movies, although it has what the MPAA shyly calls "some" drug content. It\s not grungy, although it has Joe Cocker in it. It\s not political, which means it\s political to its core. Most miraculous of all, it\s not dated; the stories could be happening now, and in fact, they are.
For a film that is almost wall to wall with music, it has a full-bodied plot. The characters, mostly named after Beatles songs, include Lucy the angelic
Evan Rachel Wood
, who moves from middle America to New York; Jude 
Jim Sturgess
", a Liverpool ship welder who works his way to New York on a ship, and Lucys brother, Max "
Joe Anderson
, a college student who has dropped out I guess. They now all share a pad in Greenwich Village with their musician friends, the Hendrixian Jo-Jo 
Martin Luther McCoy
, the Joplinesque Sadie 
Dana Fuchs
 and the lovelorn Prudence T.V. Carpio, who loves women but doesn’t feel free to express her true feelings.
"Jude and Lucy fall in love, and they all go through a hippie period on Dr. Roberts Magic Bus, where the doctor Bono and his bus bear a striking resemblance to Ken Keseys magical mystery tour. They also get guidance from Mr. Kite "
Eddie Izzard
, having been some days in preparation. But then things turn serious as Max goes off to Vietnam and the story gets swept up in the anti-war movement.
Yet when I say "story," don\t start thinking about a lot of dialogue and plotting. Almost everything happens as an illustration to a Beatles song. The arrangements are sometimes familiar, sometimes radically altered, and the voices are all new; the actors either sing or sync, and often they find a mood in a song that we never knew was there before. When Prudence sings "I Want to Hold Your Hand," for example, I realized how wrong I was to ever think that was a happy song. It\s not happy if it\s a hand you are never, never, never going to hold. The love that dare not express its name turns in sadness to song.
Julie Taymor, famous as the director of "
The Lion King
" on Broadway, is a generously inventive choreographer, such as in a basic-training scene where all the drill sergeants look like G.I. Joe; a sequence where inductees in Jockey shorts carry the Statue of Liberty through a Vietnam field, and cross-cutting between dancing to Beatles clone bands at an American high school prom and in a Liverpool dive bar. There are underwater sequences which approach ballet, a stage performance that turns into musical warfare, strawberries that bleed, rooftop concerts and a montage combining crashing waves with the Detroit riots.
But all I\m doing here is list-making. The beauty is in the execution. The experience of the movie is joyous. I don\t even want to know about anybody who complains they aren\t hearing "the real Beatles."
Fred Astaire
"wasnt"
Cole Porter
, either. These songs are now more than 40 years old, some of them, and are timeless, and hearing these unexpected talents singing them yes, and Bono, Izzard and Cocker, too only underlines their astonishing quality.
You weren\t alive in the 1960s? Or the \70s or \80s? You\re like the guy on the IMDb message board who thought the band was named the "Beetles," and didn\t even get it when people made Volkswagen jokes because he hadn\t heard of VW Beetles, either. All is forgiven.
Jay Leno
has a Jaywalking spot for you. Just about anybody else is likely to enjoy "Across the Universe."
I\m sure there were executives who thought it was suicidal to set a "Beatles musical" in the "Vietnam era." But this is a movie that fires its songs like flowers at the way we live now. It\s the kind of movie you watch again, like listening to a favorite album. It was scheduled for the Toronto Film Festival but was previewed as several Toronto films were for critics in major cities. I was drowning in movies and deadlines, and this was the only one I went to see twice. Now do your homework and rent the DVD of "
"A Hard Days Night"
" if you\ve never seen it. The thought that there are readers who would get this far in this review of this film and never have seen that film is unbearably sad. Cheer me up. Don\t let me down repeat three times.

13 Assassins 2011 Cast
Koji Yakusho as Shimada
Takayuki Yamada as Shinrokuro
Yusuke Iseya as Koyata
Goro Inagaki as Lord Naritsugu
Masachika Ichimura as Hanbei Kitou
Mikijiro Hira as Sir Doi
Directed by Takeshi Miike
Written by Daisuke Tengan
Action, Adventure, Drama, Foreign Rated NR
considerable samurai mayhem 141 minutes
"13 Assassins" has what many action pictures need, a villain who transcends evil and ascends to a realm of barbaric madness. Against this creature and his private army, a band of samurai is mustered to end his terror. Their heroism against impossible odds is a last hurrah for the samurai code; the film is set in 1844, toward the end of the medieval Edo period, when true samurai warriors were growing rare.
The film is terrifically entertaining, an ambitious big-budget epic, directed with great visuals and sound by
Takeshi Miike
. The last 45 minutes are devoted to an inventive and ingenious battle scene, but it\s not the sort of incomprehensible mayhem we often find in recent actioners. It\s a lesson to the queasy-cam auteurs, because Miike choreographs the action to make it comprehensible — and, more important, has spent his first two acts establishing the characters. We know who the 13 samurai are, and we understand why many of them behave as they do under threat of death. The care taken with the screenplay and the shot composition deserves comparison with Kurosawa\s even better "Seven Samurai."
The film opens with stark, bloody simplicity. A man kneels in a courtyard and disembowels himself in protest against Lord Naritsugu 
Goro Inagaki
", the half-brother of the shogun. This seppuku was inspired by Naritsugus cruelty, which we see demonstrated in appalling detail. He amputates some victims, kicks the severed heads of others across rooms and exercises the right to rape anyone in his domain. He isnt a twisted caricature, but a preening narcissist; the shogun inexplicably plans to promote him."
To correct this evil in the land, Sir Doi 
Mikijiro Hira
 seeks the samurai Shimada 
Koji Yakusho
 and finds him peacefully fishing atop a ladder in the sea — but with his sword of course nearby. Shimada then seeks another dozen warriors to join him, and this process is familiar to us from countless other movies. Each of the recruits has his own personality and back story, some more elaborate than others, and of course there must be a little comic relief, although Koyata 
Yusuke Iseya
 grows more serious in the heat of battle.
"The odds for these heroes seem impossible; they are only 13 and Lord Naritsugu fields at least 200 against them. Miike spares us the whimsy that 13 good men can defeat 200 evil ones, and has his samurai rig an entire village as a trap. Its clear this is planned, but the details remain vague, and when the surprises begin, it would be logical, I think, to ask exactly how the assassins found the time and resources to marshal such an elaborate ambush. Logical, but not fair; you dont ask questions like that in movies that require your belief."
Samurai films have a rich history, and Miike evokes it elegantly with traditional costumes, idealistic dialogue, sharp characterizations, and a gloriously choreographed fight sequence that must extend in one form or another for 40 minutes. I often find fight scenes in movies boring, because they substitute movement for drama. But in "13 Assassins," characters are involved who we know and understand, and the general melee is broken down into structured vignettes. Hollywood action directors could study this film, especially in the way it focuses on story in the midst of violence.
There is a subtext in the film. The 13 assassins are essentially making a last stand for the traditional samurai code. Modern times are encroaching on Japan, and the shogunate is corrupt, decadent and a hive of nepotism. I was reminded in a lateral way of Yamata\s "
Twilight Samurai
" 2004, a very good film set in 1868, about a samurai who works for his clan as an accountant, and is forced to recall the code of his tradition.
While watching "13 Assassins," I was sure CGI effects must have been used, but I was rarely able to notice them. That\s the point, as it always was in traditional special effects: to deceive the eye, not insult it. Most of the movement here is at least somewhat plausible in terms of the real world. Too often CGI is an excuse for what amounts to live-action cartoons. Here is a film that could be studied for its lessons by the manufacturers of Friday night action blockbusters.

To Forget Venice 1980 Cast
Erland Josephson as Nicky
Mariangelo Melato as Anna
Eleonora Giorgi as Claudia
David Pontremoli as Picchio
Hella Petri as Aunt Marta
Fred Personne as Fossino
"To Forget Venice" doesn\t feel like a story, it feels\r\nlike an idea for a story, and that\s the problem with it: We can figure out\r\nfairly early in the film how the neatly symmetrical relationships are going to\r\nwork themselves out, and then all we\re left with is the behavior of the actors\r\nworking them out. There are few surprises. And when a film really lives, it\s\r\nfull of surprises, because each scene contains the possibility that the\r\ncharacters will change.
But
Franco Brusati
, the director and co-author of "To Forget Venice,"\r\nbegins with a simple idea: We must put behind us the dependencies and dreams of\r\nyouth, and accept middle age as gracefully as we can. Now this is a fine idea,\r\nbut it is not necessarily the only good idea on the subject - and the problem\r\nwith "To Forget Venice" is that we realize, early and with a sinking\r\nheart, that Brusati\s characters are doomed to illustrate it. Nobody\s going to\r\nbe allowed to upset the boat.
Here\r\nare his characters, neatly arrayed. There is Marta, the aging but still\r\nbeautiful opera prima donna who lives in one of the big, ancient country houses\r\nthat line the mainland near Venice. She has never married, but has adopted a\r\nniece, Anna. Marta also has a brother, Nicky. A visit to Venice is planned, and\r\nAnna and Nicky, who are both homosexuals, join Marta in the big house. Anna\r\nbrings along her lover, Claudia, and Nicky brings his lover, Picchio.
So\r\nwe have here three characters Marta, Anna and Nicky who are no longer as\r\nyoung as they once were. All three live in the past, in the dreams of youth.\r\nMarta remembers her singing, and basks in the praise of the others. Anna and\r\nNicky grasp youth through their younger lovers. Everyone is, of course,\r\nnarcissistic, and Brusati himself writes of "each of them trying to\r\nperpetuate his own youth by reflecting himself in the partner as in a distant\r\nmirror."
"There\r\nis another element to the story: Martas past greatness, her fame through her\r\nart, gives them all something to bask in. Because she stood aside from ordinary\r\nhumans, somehow they all have license to be unconventional. But then Marta\r\ndies, and the film moves into the dreadfully predictable passages in which the\r\nother characters are invited to take a deep breath, make a realistic assessment\r\nof themselves, and stop living in the past."
"All\r\nvery fine, and well and good, but deadening. Allow me to be irreverent for a\r\nmoment, in the face of Brusatis pious hopes for human nature. What we have\r\nhere, after all, is a film that would have created a major scandal a decade\r\nago: Not one but two homosexual couples, lots of nudity and sex, and an\r\natmosphere of decadence and decay."
"To\r\nForget Venice" would have been such a sensation in 1970 that any plot\r\nwould have been forgiven and if you doubt me, remember the plot of "I Am\r\nCurious Yellow". Wouldn\t it have been more interesting to simply\r\nfollow these potentially engaging characters through whatever might have\r\nhappened in their situation, instead of forcing them to illustrate the lessons\r\nthey\ve learned?

Sleuth 1972 Cast
Laurence Olivier as Andrew Wyke
Michael Caine as Milo Tindle
Alec Cawthorne as Inspector Doppler
Directed by Joseph L. Mankiewicz
Screenplay by Anthony Shaffer
Foreign, Thriller Rated PG
138 minutes "We come upon Andrew Wyke, the mystery writer, in an appropriate setting. Hes in the middle of his vast garden, which is filled with shrubbery planted to form a maze. There is no way into, or out of, the maze--unless you know the secret. The better we come to know Andrew Wyke, the more this seems like the kind of garden he would have."
Wyke is a game-player. His enormous Tudor country manor is filled with games, robots, performing dolls, dart boards, and chess tables. He also plays games with people. One day poor Milo Tindle comes for a meeting with him. Milo is everything Wyke detests: only half-British, with the wrong accent, and "brand-new country gentleman clothes." But Milo and Andrew\s wife have fallen in love, and they plan to marry. So Andrew has a little scheme he wants to float. He is willing--indeed, happy--to give up his wife, but only if he can be sure she\ll stay gone. He wants to be sure Milo can support her, and he suggests that Milo steal the Wyke family jewels and pawn them in Amsterdam. Then Milo will have a small fortune, and Andrew can collect the insurance.
Up to this point, everything in "Sleuth" seems so matter-of-fact that there\s no hint how complicated things will get later on. But they do get complicated, and deadly, and reality begins to seem like a terribly fragile commodity. Andrew and Milo play games of such labyrinthine ferociousness that they eventually seem to forget all about Andrew\s wife and his mistress and to be totally absorbed with stalking each other in a macabre game of cat and mouse.
"Sleuth," a totally engrossing entertainment, is funny and scary by turns, and always superbly theatrical. It\s the kind of mystery we keep saying they don\t make anymore, but sometimes they do, and the British seem to write them better than anyone. The movie is based on the long-running play by
Anthony Shaffer
, who also wrote Hitchcock\s "
Frenzy
." Both films have in common a nice flair for dialogue and a delicate counterpoint between the ironic and the gruesome.
What really makes the movie come alive--what makes it work better than the play, really--are the lead performances by Sir
Laurence Olivier
,
Michael Caine
, and
Alec Cawthorne
. Olivier plays the wealthy mystery writer Andrew Wyke as a true-blue British eccentric: His head, like his house, is cluttered with ornate artifacts largely without function. The hero of his detective stories, the wonderfully named St. John Lord Merridewe, is equally dotty. Olivier is clearly having fun in the role, and he throws in all kinds of accents, asides, and nutty pieces of business.
"Michael Caine, who might seem an unlikely candidate to play Milo Tindle, turns out to be a very good one. He manages somehow to seem smaller and less assured than Olivier even while he towers over Olivier. And he is strangely touching as he dresses up in an absurd clowns costume to steal the jewels. Inspector Doppler, the kindly old investigator who suspects that Andrew has murdered Milo, is played by Alec Cawthorne, a veteran stage actor making his movie debut."
It\s difficult to say more about "Sleuth" without giving away its plot--which in this case would be a capital offense. Let me just mention that the play makes a remarkably easy transition to the screen because of director Joseph L. Mankiewicz\s willingness to respect its timing and dialogue, instead of trying to jazz it up cinematically. And, despite the fact that most of the movie takes place indoors, we never get the sense of visual limitations because Ken Adam\s set designs give us such an incredible multitude of things to look at and through in the mansion.

Ghost Dog: The Way of the Samurai 2000 Cast
Forest Whitaker as Ghost Dog
Henry Silva as Ray Vargo
Tricia Vessey as Louise Vargo
John Tormey as Louie
Written and Directed by Jim Jarmusch
Action, Adventure, Crime, Drama, Thriller Rated R
For Strong Violence and Language 116 minutes
It helps to understand that the hero of "Ghost Dog: The Way of the Samurai" is crazy. Well, of course he is. He lives in a shack on a rooftop with his pigeons. He dresses like a homeless man. "He has no friends and never talks to anybody," according to the mother of the little girl in the movie. Actually, he does talk: to the little girl and to a Haitian ice cream man. The Haitian speaks no English and Ghost Dog speaks no French, so they simply speak in their own languages and are satisfied with that. What\s your diagnosis? Ghost Dog 
Forest Whitaker
 is a killer for the mob. He got into this business because one day a mobster saved his life--and so, since he follows The Way of the Samurai, he must dedicate his life to his master. The mobster is named Louie 
John Tormey
". He orders hits by sending Ghost Dog messages by carrier pigeon. Ghost Dog insists on being paid once a year, on the first day of autumn. When the mob bosses want Ghost Dog rubbed out, theyre startled to discover that Louie doesnt know his name or where he lives; their only contact is the pigeons."
It seems strange that a black man would devote his life to doing hired killing for a group of Italian-American gangsters after having met only one of them. But then it\s strange, too, that Ghost Dog lives like a medieval Japanese samurai. The whole story is so strange, indeed, that I\ve read some of the other reviews in disbelief. Are movie critics so hammered by absurd plots that they can\t see how truly, profoundly weird "Ghost Dog" is? The reviews treat it matter of factly: Yeah, here\s this hit man, he lives like a samurai, he gets his instructions by pigeon, blah . . . blah . . . and then they start talking about the performances and how the director,
Jim Jarmusch
, is paying homage to Kurosawa and "High Noon." But the man is insane! In a quiet, sweet way, he is totally unhinged and has lost all touch with reality. His profound sadness, which permeates the touching Whitaker performance, comes from his alienation from human society, his loneliness, his attempt to justify inhuman behavior murder with a belief system the samurai code that has no connection with his life or his world. Despite the years he\s spent studying The Way of the Samurai , he doesn\t even reflect that since his master doesn\t subscribe to it, their relationship is meaningless.
I make this argument because I\ve seen "Ghost Dog" twice, and admired it more after I focused on the hero\s insanity. The first time I saw it, at Cannes, I thought it was a little too precious, an exercise in ironic style, not substance. But look more deeply, and you see the self-destructive impulse that guides Ghost Dog in the closing scenes, as he sadly marches forth to practice his code in the face of people who only want to kill him whether he survives is not the point.
Jarmusch is mixing styles here almost recklessly and I like the chances he takes. The gangsters played by colorful character actors like
Henry Silva
,
Richard Portnow
,
Cliff Gorman
and
Victor Argo
 sit in their clubhouse doing sub-Scorsese while the Louie character tries to explain to them how he uses an invisible hit man. Ghost Dog, meanwhile, mopes sadly around the neighborhood, solemnly recommending Rashomon to a little girl "you may want to wait and read it when you\re a little older" and miscommunicating with the ice cream man. By the end, Whitaker\s character has generated true poignance.
"If the mobsters are on one level of reality and Ghost Dog on another, then how do we interpret some of the Dogs killings, particularly the one where he shoots a man by sneaking under his house and firing up through the lavatory pipe while the guy is shaving? This is a murder that demands Inspector Clouseau as its investigator. Jarmusch seems to have directed with his tongue in his cheek, his hand over his heart, and his head in the clouds. The result is weirdly intriguing."

Without a Clue 1988 Cast
Michael Caine as Sherlock Holmes
Ben Kingsley as Watson
Jeffrey Jones as Inspector Lestrade
Lysette Anthony as Fake Leslie
Paul Freeman as Moriarty
Nigel Davenport as Smithwick
Pat Keen as Mrs. Hudson
Peter Cook as Greenhough
Directed by Thom Eberhardt
Produced by Marc Stirdivant
Screenplay by Gary Murphy
Larry Strawther Photographed by
Alan Hume Edited by
Peter Tanner Music by
Henry Mancini Comedy, Crime, Mystery, Thriller
Rated PG 108 minutes
"Without a Clue" begins with the premise that Sherlock Holmes never existed; that the man known as "Holmes" was, in fact, a third-rate actor named Reginald Kincaid, and he was hired by Dr.
John Watson
to play the role.
"This is an amusing premise, but it is not enough. In order to effectively satirize something, you must first transcend it. And the universe of Holmes and Watson is such a complete exercise in self-satire that it is perhaps impossible to go beyond it. Satire consists of poking fun at that which takes itself too seriously, and the Sherlock Holmes stories never make that mistake; theyre in on the joke."
That said, does "Without a Clue" have virtues of its own? It does. It has
Ben Kingsley
as Dr. Watson, that most humorless of foils, and it has
Michael Caine
as Reginald Kincaid, a buffoon who rises to a sort of grandeur when he dons the deerstalker.
Both actors have been cleverly typecast. Caine is not playing Holmes, but an actor playing Holmes, and no one is better at playing frauds who become accidental heroes. And Kingsley, who can be the wittiest of men as he demonstrated in "
Gandhi
", is also able to project the complete lack of wit. This is necessary for any actor playing Watson, a man for whom the slightest shred of self-knowledge would have been disastrous.
The story is much the sort of thing Arthur Conan Doyle might have concocted for one of his real Holmes adventures. Master criminals have broken into the Royal Mint and stolen the original engravings for the 5-pound note, substituting their own counterfeit plates. The result is a neat double irony: While the thieves issue real notes, the mint issues bogus bills.
This is clearly a case for the great sleuth of Baker Street, although Inspector Lestrade of Scotland Yard 
Jeffrey Jones
 believes he is more than adequate to solve the case himself.
What nobody knows is that Watson and Kincaid, or "Holmes," have had a serious falling-out after the actor got drunk and refused to follow his script. Watson has decided to end his long masquerade as the chronicler of Holmes\ adventures, and reveal himself as the real genius behind all of those famous cases: the "Crime Doctor." Alas, nobody believes Watson, especially not the editor of the Strand magazine 
Peter Cook
, who has printed all of the Holmes cases and wants nothing to do with a substitute hero.
In desperation, and with distraught cabinet ministers crowding his waiting room, Watson tries to hire Kincaid again. And Kincaid takes the job on a cash basis 10-pound notes only, of course.
What follows is a fairly straightforward Holmes adventure, with a guest appearance by Professor Moriarty and a walk-on for Mrs. Hudson, the landlady who, if ever there was a woman who should have sold her memoirs to the scandal sheets, was that woman.
There is also an annoying subplot involving the Baker Street Irregulars, a group of snot-nosed street urchins who spy on everyone and report back to Holmes. In the Doyle books, Holmes would have booted them down the stairs. Perhaps they are in the movie to provide a lure for pre-teen viewers - most of whom have never heard of Sherlock Holmes in any case.
The film was shot on Victorian locations in London and elsewhere, including subterranean warehouses and canals, and it has an authentic look. But Caine and Kingsley are left too often with little to do except stand on either side of the screen and chew over their relationship as drunken actor and brilliant but anonymous detective.
Once revealed, that particular joke is over, but this movie keeps chewing at it, trying to worry out one more laugh.
There is also a disappointment in the general development of the plot. I will not breathe a word about the specifics of the investigation. That disappointment is that Reginald Kincaid rises to the occasion and becomes worthy of being known as Sherlock Holmes.
"This autumn Ive become more than ever aware of Level 1 moviemaking, in which the audience is given credit for almost no intelligence, and the plot dares not provide more than the usual obligatory twists. The standard cliches of this situation provide for the Caine character to rise to greatness and become reconciled with the Kingsley character. So why not provide a surprise? Any surprise."
It is disheartening to sit in a movie and know at the 15-minute mark what must be done, and watch the filmmakers take another 90 minutes to do it exactly as it has always been done before.
There is, in case you are interested, an atmospheric new Chatham River Press volume titled Great Works of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle for sale on the "bargain" counters at local book stores. It is bound in "real leather," according to a sticker on its gilt-embossed cover, and it contains reproductions of all of the Holmes stories and novels as they first appeared in the Strand. The page size is just right, the type is clear, the paper is yellowed and flimsy, and the gilt-edging process sort of sticks the pages together, so that the book crinkles as it comes open in your hands. There is an illustration on nearly every page, and on Page 497 you can read the immortal line: " `Come, Watson, come!\ he cried. `The game is afoot!\ " This book sells for less than $12 and will make you smile about every 30 seconds, which is more than can be said for "Without a Clue."

The Fixer 1968 Cast
Alan Bates as Yakov Bok
Dirk Bogarde as Bibikov
Georgia Brown as Marla Golov
Hugh Griffith as Lebedev
Elizabeth Hartman as Zinaida
Ian Holm as Grubeshov
David Opatoshu as Latke
production Edward Lewis
Directed by John Frankenheimer
From a screenplay by Dalton Trumbo
Photographed by Marcel Grignon
Based on the novel by Bernard Malamud
Crime, Drama, Mystery 132 minutes
At the very end of "The Fixer," the film\s persecuted hero walks up the steps of a courtroom building to receive the public trial he fought so stubbornly for. Inspirational music fills the theater, and a narrator intones: "The name is Yakov Bok -- a Jew, innocent ... and your brother."
This speech disturbs me, and I think it helps explain what I found disappointing about the film.
John Frankenheimer
has already spent more than two hours introducing us to Yakov Bok, and convincing us of his Jewishness, his innocence and our brotherhood with him. That is what the film is about. Why, then, do we have to be told? Why do we have to have the moral spelled out for us, as if the film itself meant nothing?
"Frankenheimer has made a film about very powerful, emotionally charged events. His hero, a Jew during the last years of decadent Czarist Russia, has been accused of a crime he did not commit. Worse, the crime is allegedly ritual murder, and the czars deputies are using the case to stir up anti-Semitism and distract criticism of the government. The film is based on Bernard Malamuds novel, which in turn was drawn from an actual experience."
"Now a historical event is one thing, and a film about it is another. Frankenheimers task was to make a film that, in itself, would make a moral statement. He has failed. The film has little reality of its own; instead, it draws its power and emotion from the raw material of its subject matter. We are moved, not by what we see on the screen, but by its implications."
The temptation is to praise the film because we agree with its message. This is the same critical fallacy that led to praise of "Judgment at Nuremberg" -- a corrupt, commercial film -- simply because we disapproved of Nazi war crimes, A movie doesn\t become good simply by taking the correct ideological position.
In "The Fixer," Frankenheimer and
Dalton Trumbo
, the writer, have missed no opportunity to give us speeches telling us what is happening and what it all means. The victim played with great sensitivity by
Alan Bates
" is not only a Christ figure, but even says he is. He makes a little speech to his guard about love and brotherhood. The representatives of the czar likewise make speeches about their own motives. The prisoners bravery and heroism are liberally commented on. The significance of anti-Semitism in human affairs is analyzed."
And at the end, we are given that terribly inappropriate little speech, just to make sure we didn\t miss the point. It\s a sort of mid-cult "
Dragnet
" conclusion, telling the audience how the case turned out. But what were needed were fewer self-conscious humanistic speeches, less articulate nobility, and more of the real experience.
Archibald MacLeish said a poem should not mean, but be. It is a lesson John Frankenheimer should learn.
"He should have shown us his heros suffering, and the Kafkaesque legal tortures of the state, without commenting on them. He should have trusted us to find our own meaning in the material. He should have trusted the film medium to make his points without a lot of bell-ringing liberal prose. Most of all, he should have trusted Alan Bates, whose performance is so deep and compassionate it could have carried any weight of significance without all those overblown speeches."

The Penthouse 1967 Cast
Suzy Kendall as Barbara
Terence Morgan as Bruce
Tony Beckley as Tom
Norman Rodway as Dick
Martine Beswick as Harry
production Tahiti
Directed by Peter Collinson
Photographed by Arthur Lewis
From the play "Meteor Man" by C. Scott Forbes
Comedy, Thriller Cool it, folks. Keep calm. Don\t let "The Penthouse" get out of control like "
I, A Woman
" did. Let\s try to head off the vigilantes at the bend. This isn\t an evil movie, and it\s not an example of the pornography of violence, or at least not a very good example. What\s more, it isn\t deep and meaningful either, so don\t think I\m going to devise some noble defense or anything.
"The Penthouse," quite simply, is a pretty good shocker. Shockers are standard fare in the movies and always have been, but successful ones are rare. It\s a relief to find one that\s made with skill and a certain amount of intelligence. "The Penthouse" isn\t in the same class with "
Psycho
" 1960 but it\s in the same school.
"Its the first work of"
Peter Collinson
, a 28-year-old British director who made it in slightly over three weeks and for less than $100,000. He also wrote the screenplay. When I interviewed him a couple of months ago, be said he was trying, purely and simply, to tell an exciting story. He did not believe in "message" movies, he said.
Since then, Paramount has moved, oh, so cleverly to exploit "The Penthouse" and make lots of bucks. Step One: A campaign of suggestive teaser ads "If what happens in The Penthouse happened to you . . .". This is to establish the movie as controversial and daring, and it was a big help when Ch. 5 refused to run the ads on TV. Step Two: A sanctimonious press release, supposedly written by Collinson in which he explains that the movie is really about the horror that lurks in the minds of men, and how when we discover our true inner selves we don\t want to reveal them. Thus "The Penthouse" is really a movie with a serious message about self-discovery, etc.
"Nuts. My advice is to forget the ads and forget the philosophy and go see it as a movie, if you want to. Its about a real estate agent "
Terence Morgan
 and his mistress 
Suzy Kendall
, and my, how she\s grown since "To Sir, with Love". They spend the night in the penthouse of an unoccupied high-rise. In the morning, there comes a knock at the door: supposedly the meter men.
They say their names are Tom 
Tony Beckley
 and Dick 
Norman Rodway
, and explain that Harry is waiting downstairs. Then they tie the guy into a chair, give the girl enough whisky to float a regiment of Irish poets, get high on pot, make love to the girl, taunt the man, recite long tales of self-pity, dig into the psychological motives for their behavior, and then start over again. Eventually Harry Martine Berwick turns up, in her first speaking role her debut: "One Million Years B.C.".
"By the evidence, the movie was photographed by the hardest working cameraman in history. He sneaks up on his shots from every angle except through the floor, and swoops, dips, whirls and zig-zags, meanwhile moving in and out of focus so dramatically youd think he was"
Andy Warhol
with skill. The result is overdone and a little dizzying. So is the dialog, which is out of Freud by way of Mickey Spillane and
Tennessee Williams
"We\re like those poor little alligators" Tom whines. "We didn\t want to be flushed into the sewers, but we were. And we can\t help it if we\re alligators."
"Collinson doesnt actually depict as much sex as Paramount so generously credits him for, and there is little actual physical violence. He understands, as Hitchock does, that horror is more terrifying when the characters can see it but the audience cant."

Dear America: Letters Home From Vietnam 1988 Directed by
Bill Couturie Produced by
The Couturie Co Screenplay by
Richard Dewhurst Couturie
Documentary Rated PG-13
86 minutes On the soundtrack, we hear the voices of these soldiers, in the words they wrote home. They speak of patriotism, of confidence, of new friendships. In their letters there is a sense of wonder at this new world they have found, a world so different from the American cities and towns they left behind. And then gradually the tone of their letters begins to change.
There have been many great movies about Vietnam. This is the one that completes the story. It has no plot except that thousands of young men went to a faraway country and had unspeakable experiences there, and many of them died or were wounded for life in body or soul.
This movie is so powerful precisely because it is so simple. The words are the words of the soldiers themselves, and the images are taken from their own home movies and from TV news footage of the war.
There are moments here that cannot be forgotten, and most of them are due to the hard work of the filmmaker, director
Bill Couturie
, who has not taken just any words and any old footage, but precisely the right words to go with the images. Couturie began with an anthology of letters written home by U.S. soldiers in Vietnam. Then he screened the entire archive of TV news footage shot by NBC-TV from 1967 to 1969 - 2 million feet of film totaling 926 hours. He also gained access to footage from the Defense Department, including previously classified film of action under fire. Much of the footage in this film has never been seen publicly before, and watching it, you know why.
What Couturie and his researchers have done is amazing. In many cases, they have matched up individual soldiers with their letters - we see them as we hear their words, and then we discover their fates.
"I tell you truthfully I doubt if I\ll come out of this alive," a private named Raymond Griffiths writes home to his girlfriend. "In my original squad, I\m the only one left unharmed." He died in action on the Fourth of July, 1966.
There are amateur 8mm home movies here, of GIs clowning in front of the camera, and cracking beers, and cleaning their weapons.
There are frightening fire fights and unflinching shots of men in the process of dying. And there are chilling scenes, such as the one when Gen. William Westmoreland greets the survivors from a bloodbath and his words are the words of an automaton, with utterly no emotion in his voice as he "chats" with his troops. He is so false, it seems like a bad performance. If this footage had been shown on TV at the time, he might have been forced to resign.
"The movie follows a chronology that roughly corresponds to a soldiers year in Vietnam. From the first days of swimming in the surf to the last exhausted days of fear and despair, it never looks away."
And the words of the soldiers have the eloquence of simple truth. One soldier writes of the bravery of men who rescued their comrades under enemy fire. Another writes of a momentary hush in a tank battle on Christmas Eve, and of hearing someone begin to sing "Silent Night" and others joining in.
The words in the letters are read by some 40 different actors and actresses, whose voices you can sometimes identify, until you stop thinking in those terms. The voices include
Robert De Niro
, Martin and
Charlie Sheen
,
Kathleen Turner
,
Tom Berenger
,
Brian Dennehy
, Howard Rollins Jr.,
Sean Penn
,
Matt Dillon
,
Michael J. Fox
. The music on the soundtrack is all from the period, and then, at the end of the movie, there is a heartbreaking flash-forward to the Vietnam War Memorial in Washington, D.C., 15 years later, and we hear Bruce Springsteen\s "Born in the USA" as
Ellen Burstyn
reads from a letter that the mother of a dead veteran left at the foot of the wall of names:
Dear Bill,
"Today is Feb. 13, 1984. I came to this black wall again to see and touch your name, William R. Stocks, and as I do I wonder if anyone ever stops to realize that next to your name, on this black wall, is your mothers heart. A heart broken 15 years ago today, when you lost your life in Vietnam."
They tell me the letters I write to you and leave here at this memorial are waking others up to the fact that there is still much pain left, after all these years, from the Vietnam War.
This I know. I would rather have had you for 21 years, and all the pain that goes with losing you, than never to have had you at all.
Mom
Choose any film as the best movie ever made about Vietnam, and this is the other half of the same double feature.
Francois Truffaut
once wrote that it was impossible to make an "anti-war film," because any war film, no matter what its message, was sure to be exhilarating.
He did not live to see this film.

The Great Buck Howard 2009 Cast
John Malkovich as Buck
Colin Hanks as Troy
Emily Blunt as Valerie
Griffin Dunne as Jonathan
Steve Zahn as Local
Ricky Jay as Gil
Written and directed by Sean McGinly
Action, Adventure, Comedy, Drama, Indie Rated PG
some language including suggestive remarks, and a drug reference 87 minutes
Is there anyone better than
John Malkovich
"at barely containing his temper? He gravitates toward characters who do not suffer fools lightly, and that would include the Great Buck Howard, who once was Johnny Carsons favorite guest. Buck was dropped from Johnnys guest list and now tours the provinces, taking his magic act from small stages to smaller ones, but he still has his dignity."
"I
love
this town!" he shouts with outstretched arms in Akron, and Akron still loves him. He is famous for his "signature effect," in which his evening\s fee is given to an audience member, and he uses his psychic powers to find it. He has never failed, and no one has ever discovered how he does it. Buck was named "The Great" by Carson and still maintains a facade of Greatness, even in front of Troy 
Colin Hanks
, Tom\s son, his newly hired road manager. Malkovich invests him with self-importance and yet slyly suggests it\s not all an act; you believe at some level Buck really does love that town, and also when he says, as he always does, "I
love
you people!"
"The Great Buck Howard" is told from Troy\s point of view. His father 
Tom Hanks
" fervently wants him to enter law school, but he wants to test show biz, and this is his first contact with any degree of fame. He never penetrates the Great Buck Howards facade and never do we, but he sure does learn a lot about show biz, some of it intimately from Valerie "
Emily Blunt
, a new PR person hired for Buck\s spectacular new illusion in Cincinnati. Troy learns to carry bags, open doors, deal with local reps and supply mineral water, not distilled "I\m not an iron," Buck crisply tells Troy\s eventual replacement.
We see Buck as Troy does, as an impenetrable mystery. Buck is far from forgotten he guests on shows hosted by Regis Philbin and Kelly Ripa,
Jon Stewart
"and Martha Stewart, all playing themselves. He can still fill a room, even if its a smaller room. His manager, Gil "
Ricky Jay
, who always seems to know the inside odds, even gets him a Las Vegas booking. What happens there, and how it happens, is perceptive about show biz and even more perceptive about Buck and his "signature effect."
Well, how
does
he find the person in the room holding the money -- every time? Rumors are common that he uses a hidden spotter, whispering into a mike hidden in his ear. When Troy tells him this, Buck invites two doctors onstage to peer into his ears, then turns his back to the room and covers his head with a black cloth. Does he still find the money?
"If he does, it cant because of psychic powers, can it? I firmly believe such illusions are never the result of psychic powers, but I am fascinated by them, anyway. The wisdom of this film, directed and written by"
Sean McGinly
, is to never say. Troy practically lives with the man and doesn\t have a clue. He\s asked if Buck is gay, and he replies truthfully, "I don\t know. I\ve never seen him with anybody." Colin Hanks is affecting as a man young enough and naive enough to be fascinated by whatever it is Buck represents. Emily Blunt is sweetly kind to him. No one else could have played Buck better than Malkovich. I
love
this guy.
"Ive read one review of this film that complains we never meet the real Buck Howard. Of course we dont. There may"
be
"no real Buck Howard. But the film is funny and perceptive in the way it shows the humiliations for a man with Bucks tender vanity: The ladies singing onstage. The many who have no idea who he is. Being bumped off the news by"
Jerry Springer
. Being bumped off
Jay Leno
for
Tom Arnold
.
Distilled water.
"Incidentally: McGinlys screenplay is based on his observations as road manager for the Amazing Kreskin, to whom the film is dedicated."

Two Weeks Notice 2002 Cast
Sandra Bullock as Lucy Kelson
Hugh Grant as George Wade
Alicia Witt as June Carter
Dorian Missick as Tony
Written and Directed by Marc Lawrence
Comedy, Romance Rated PG-13
For Sex-Related Humor 100 minutes
If I tell you "Two Weeks Notice" is a romantic comedy and it stars
Sandra Bullock
and
Hugh Grant
", what do you already know, and what do you need to know? You already know: That when they meet the first time, they dont like each other. That circumstances bring them together. That they get along fine, but are sometimes scared by that and back off a little. That they are falling in love without knowing it. That just when theyre about to know it, circumstances force them apart. That they seem doomed to live separately, their love never realized. That circumstances bring them back together again. That they finally cave in and admit theyre in love."
You need to know: What her job is. What his job is. What they disagree about. What their personality flaws are. And whether, just when their eyes are about to meet, it is a woman who seems to lure him away, or a man who seems to lure her away? You also need to know certain plug-in details of the movie, such as which ethnic groups and ethnic foods it will assign, and what fantasy dreams it will realize.
I have not, by making these observations, spoiled the plot of the movie. I have spoiled the plot of every romantic comedy. Just last week I saw "
Maid in Manhattan
," and with that one you also know the same things and don\t know the same things. The thing is, it doesn\t matter that you know. If the actors are charming and the dialogue makes an effort to be witty and smart, the movie will work even though it faithfully follows the ancient formulas.
Romantic comedies are the comfort food of the movies. There are nights when you don\t feel like a chef who thinks he\s more important than the food. When you feel like sliding into a booth at some Formica joint where the waitress calls you "Hon" and writes your order on a green and white Guest Check. Walking into "Two Weeks Notice" at the end of a hectic day, week, month and year, I wanted it to be a typical romantic comedy starring those two lovable people, Sandra Bullock and Hugh Grant. And it was. And some of the dialogue has a real zing to it. There were wicked little one-liners that slipped in under the radar and nudged the audience in the ribs.
She plays a Harvard Law graduate who devotes her life to liberal causes, such as saving the environment and preserving landmarks. He plays a billionaire land developer who devotes his life to despoiling the environment and tearing down landmarks. They disagree about politics and everything else. He is an insufferable egotist, superficial and supercilious, amazed by his own charm and good looks. She is phobic about germs, has a boyfriend she never sees, and thinks anybody who wants to hire her wants to sleep with her.
He is also impulsive, and after she assaults him with a demand to save her favorite landmark, he hires her on the spot, promises he will not offend her sensibilities, and gives her a big salary. He does this, of course, because he plans to violate all of his promises, and because he wants to sleep with her. He may not know that, but we do.
The first half of the movie is just about perfect, of its kind, and I found myself laughing more than I expected to, and even grinning at a colleague who was one seat over, because we were both appreciating how much better the movie was than it had to be. Then a funny thing happens. The movie sort of loses its way.
This happens at about the time the billionaire, whose name is George Wade, agrees to let the lawyer, whose name is Lucy Kelson, quit and go back to her pro bono work. Her replacement is June Carter 
Alicia Witt
", a dazzling redhead with great legs and flattery skills. We think we know that she is going to be a rat, and seduce George, and all the usual stuff. But no. She does make moves in that direction, but from instinct, not design. The fact is, shes essentially a sweet and decent person. At one point, I thought I even heard her say she was married, but I must have misheard, as no romantic comedy would ever make the Other Woman technically unavailable."
"Anyway, what goes wrong is not Alicia Witts fault. She plays the role as written. Its just that, by not making her a villain, writer-director"
Marc Lawrence
loses the momentum the formula could have supplied him. The last half of the movie basically involves the key characters being nicer than we expect them to be, more decent than we thought and less cranked-up into emotional overdrive. The result is a certain loss of energy.
I liked the movie, anyway. I like the way the characters talk. I like the way they slip in political punchlines, and how some of the dialogue actually makes points about rich and poor, left and right, male and female, Democratic and Republican. The characters are not entirely governed by their genitals.
Sandra Bullock, who produced the film, knew just what she was doing, and how to do it. Hugh Grant knew just what he was getting into. Some critics will claim they play their "usual roles," but Grant in particular finds a new note, a little more abrupt, a little more daffy, than usual. And they bring to the movie what it must have: two people who we want to see kissing each other, and amusing ways to frustrate us until, of course, they finally do.

The Lady 2012 Cast
Michelle Yeoh as Suu Kyi
David Thewlis as Michael Aris
Susan Wooldridge as Lucinda
Jonathan Raggett as Kim
Benedict Wong as Karma Phuntsho
Directed by Luc Besson
Written by Rebecca Frayn
Documentary, Drama, Foreign Rated R
for violence including some bloody images 135 minutes
It was impossible to watch the biopic "The Lady" without thinking of "
They Call It Myanmar: Lifting the Curtain
," a new documentary I saw a few weeks ago. Both are set in the once-enchanted land of Burma, which, like its neighbor India, was governed by British colonialism, and also like India suddenly received its independence in a disorderly fashion. In India, that led to the troublesome partition of Pakistan. In Burma, it led to democratic elections whose outcome was overthrown by assassination. As it was said at the time, "The British stayed too long and left too quickly."
The central figure in both films is the Nobel Peace Prize winner Aung San Suu Kyi, whose father, Aung San, was elected to head the country and then assassinated, leaving the nation to a long period of repressive dictatorship under a military junta. The daughter, always called Suu Kyi, fled after her father\s death to England, where at Oxford, she married the professor Michael Aris, had two children, and settled down as a housewife. Burma during those years disappeared behind a curtain of secrecy and paranoia. Many Burmese remained in exile, because being "Westernized" might mean their imprisonment upon return.
Only the illness of her mother drew Suu Kyi back to Burma, for a personal visit that the uneasy generals were told was non-political. Once there, however, she was swept up in protests by the National League for Democracy and implored by students to join their cause. She agreed to address a gathering. It was not publicized, but the news passed from ear to ear and a huge crowd overwhelmed police efforts to contain it. Her fate was clear: She was destined to be a leader of the struggle.
She was then kept under house arrest for most of the next 15 years, even while winning the Nobel, and allowed to see her husband and children only a few times before he died of cancer back home in Oxford. This was a strong and stubborn woman — perhaps too stubborn, she once confessed to Michael — but it required an iron will to play her role. Only in recent weeks have open elections been permitted; her movement swept into power, and Suu Kyi is now a member of Parliament.
This story is told in "The Lady," directed by the prolific French director
Luc Besson
, who has great success in making action, sci-fi and martial-arts movies "
The Fifth Element
," "Subway," "
The Professional
". For "The Lady," he has enormous resources at his command, including impressive crowd scenes staged in Thailand. The other film I mentioned, "They Call It Myanmar," is in some ways an amateur film, however skillful and polished. It was shot secretly with a consumer HD camera by
Robert H. Lieberman
, a professor at Cornell, who covers a great deal of Burmese history and crucially has interviews with Suu Kyi herself. In person, she seems much the same as the character played by
Michelle Yeoh
in "The Lady": composed, calm, resolute, with a firm British accent.
"The Lady" is more professional but, for me, "They Call It Myanmar" is more useful. Lieberman answers questions that Besson does not think to ask. The Besson film, written by
Rebecca Frayn
", does indeed deal with a real life, but follows so faithfully the traditional shape of film biography that it feels less convincing. One of its distractions is the emphasis on Suu Kyis marriage. There are too many domestic conversations, too many shots of Michael "
David Thewlis
 at home looking concerned while watching the news on TV. He is in Burma at the time of her first speech at the rally, and the film covers this momentous event mostly with reaction shots of his face in the huge crowd: proud, concerned, smiling, apprehensive, relieved.
"This is not a criticism of David Thewlis performance. He usually plays querulous or alarming characters, and this time, hes a tousle-headed bookworm, kind to the core, who places his wifes politics above everything else. He was a good man. But this should not be his story or the story of their marriage. In a sense, he should be offscreen, as he was during her house arrest."
"Yeoh is also strong in the film, embodying the qualities that Suu Kyi seems to possess. Yeoh was the original force behind this film. What was needed was a different point of entry for the screenplay, so that it isnt such a conventional biopic. Bessons busy career has centered on writing 44 credits and producing 103. He usually matches talent to each project and has directed only 17 times. Perhaps, given his strengths in genre films, he should have chosen not to direct this one, and instead selected a director like"
Mira Nair
or
Deepa Mehta
.

Vertical Limit 2000 Cast
"Chris ODonnell" as Peter Garrett
Bill Paxton as Elliot Vaughn
Robin Tunney as Annie Garrett
Nicholas Lea as Tom McLaren
Scott Glenn as Montgomery Wick
Directed by Martin Campbell
Written by Robert King
Terry Hayes Action, Adventure, Drama, Thriller
Rated PG-13 For Intense Life-Death Situations and Brief Strong Language
126 minutes Somebody, I think it was me, was observing the other day that Hollywood never really stopped making B pictures; they simply gave them $100 million budgets and marketed them as A pictures. "Vertical Limit" is an example: It\s made from obvious formulas and pulp novel conflicts, but strongly acted and well crafted. The movie may be compared with "
The Perfect Storm
," another adventure about humans challenging the implacable forces of nature. One difference is that "Storm" portrays the egos and misjudgments of its characters honestly, and makes them pay for their mistakes, while "Vertical Limit" chugs happily toward one of those endings where everyone gets exactly what they deserve, in one way or another, except for a few expendable supporting characters.
It\s a danger signal whenever a movie brings nitroglycerin into the plot. Nitro has appeared in good films like "The Wages of Fear" and "Sorcerer," but even there it exhibits most peculiar quality, which is that it invariably detonates precisely in sync with the requirements of the plot.
"Vertical Limit" introduces nitro into a situation where three climbers are trapped in an ice cave near the top of K2. They are a venal millionaire "This is a life statement for me", an experienced guide and the hero\s sister. The hero gathers a group of six volunteers on a possibly suicidal rescue mission. They bring along nitro, and although I know that explosives are used from time to time on mountains to jar loose avalanches, the movie never explains how an uncontrollable nitro explosion has the potential to help the trapped victims more than harm them. The one scene where nitro is used as intended does nothing to answer the question.
The rest of the time, the nitro is necessary to endanger the rescue party, to provide suspense, to shock us with unintended explosions and to dispose of minor characters so there won\t be anything but speaking parts left for the climax. The nitro serves as evidence that "Vertical Limit" is not so much a sincere movie about the dangers and codes of mountain climbing as a thriller with lots of snow. At that, however, it is pretty good, and I can recommend the movie as a B adventure while wondering what kind of an A movie might have been made from similar material.
"Chris ODonnell"
stars as Peter Garrett, a National Geographic photographer. He and his sister Annie 
Robin Tunney
 are shown with their father in the opening title sequence, which ends with Peter cutting a rope that sends his father falling to his death but spares himself and Annie. Otherwise three lives might have, or would have, been lost. Peter and Annie disagree about this, although the legendary toeless mountaineer Montgomery Wick 
Scott Glenn
 tells Peter he did the right thing, and it follows that someone in the movie will reprise that final decision sooner or later.
Annie, a famous climber, is trapped on the mountain with the millionaire Elliot Vaughn 
Bill Paxton
 and Tom McLaren 
Nicholas Lea
, an ace guide. Vaughn owns an airline, and his dream is to stand on the summit of K2 at the moment one of his inaugural flights zooms overhead. This involves an ascent in risky climbing weather, and a crucial error when McLaren thinks they should turn back and is overruled by the headstrong Vaughn.
Mountain climbing always inspires the same nightmare for me: I am falling from a great height, and cursing myself all the way down for being stupid enough to have climbed all the way up there voluntarily. I\ve seen climbing documentaries in which climbers do amazing things, although none quite so amazing as some of the stunts in "Vertical Limit." The blend of stunt work and effects is seamless, and there\s real suspense as they edge out of tight spots, even if occasionally we want to shout advice at the screen. In one scene, a climber is hanging by an arm over the edge of a cliff, and another climber walks up to the edge, which is at a fearsome angle, while untethered. In another, a climber anchors her ice-ax way too close to the edge. One effective sequence shows the six rescuers being landed at 22,000 feet by a risky helicopter drop. Others show the suddenness with which things can go wrong. There are the absolute deadlines imposed by the reality of the mountain after they dehydrate, they die. And strong performances, particularly by Glenn as the hard-bitten climber with a private agenda. "Vertical Limit" delivers with efficiency and craft, and there are times, when the characters are dangling over a drop of a mile, when we don\t even mind how it\s manipulating us.

The Yellow Handkerchief 2010 Cast
William Hurt as Brett
Maria Bello as May
Kristen Stewart as Martine
Eddie Redmayne as Gordy
Directed by Udayan Prasad
Written by Erin Dignam
Based on the story by Pete Hamill
Rated PG-13 for sexual content, mild violence and some strong language
The action in "The Yellow Handkerchief" takes place within the characters, who don\t much talk about it, so the faces of the actors replace dialogue. That\s more interesting than movies that lay it all out. This is the story of three insecure drifters who improbably find themselves sharing a big convertible and driving to New Orleans not long after Hurricane Katrina.
"The cars driver is a painfully insecure teenager named Gordy "
Eddie Redmayne
, who doubts most of what he does and seems to apologize just by standing there. At a rural convenience store, he encounters Martine 
Kristen Stewart
", running away from her life. He says hes driving to New Orleans. No reason. She decides to come along. No reason. They meet a quiet, reserved man named Brett "
William Hurt
, and she thinks he should come along. No particular reason.
"We now have the makings of a classic road picture. Three outsiders, a fabled destination, Louisiana back roads and a big old convertible. It must be old because modern cars have no style; three strangers cant go On the Road in a Corolla. It must be a convertible because it makes it easier to light and see the characters and the landscape they pass through. They must be back roads because what kind of a movie is it when they drive at a steady 70 on the interstate?"
The formula is obvious, but the story, curiously, turns out to be based on fact. It began as journalism by
Pete Hamill
", published in the early 1970s. In the movies rendition, Brett fell in love with a woman named May "
Maria Bello
, then spent six years in prison for manslaughter charges, although his guilt is left in doubt. Martine slowly coaxes his story out of the secretive man.
You don\t need an original story for a movie. You need original characters and living dialogue. "The Yellow Handkerchief," written by
Erin Dignam
, directed by
Udayan Prasad
", has those, and evocative performances. William Hurt occupies the silent center of the film. In many movies we interpret his reticence as masking intelligence. Here we realize its a blank slate, and could be masking anything. Although his situation is an open temptation for an actor to signal his emotions, Hurt knows that the best movie emotions are intuited by the audience, not read from emotional billboards."
Stewart is, quite simply, a wonderful actress. I must not hold the "Twilight" movies against her. She played the idiotic fall-girl written for her, as well as that silly girl could be played, and now that "Twilight: New Moon" has passed the $300 million mark, she has her choice of screenplays for her next three films, as long as one of them is "
The Twilight Saga: Eclipse
." In recent film after film, she shows a sure hand and an intrinsic power. I last saw her in "
Welcome to the Rileys
," where she played a runaway working as a hooker in New Orleans. In both films she had many scenes with experienced older actors Hurt,
James Gandolfini
. In both she was rock solid. Playing insecure and neurotic, yes, but rock solid.
The story of Redmayne, who plays Gordy, is unexpected. He fits effortlessly into the role of the scrawny, uncertain 15-year-old Louisiana kid. Yet I learn he is 27, a Brit who went to Eton, a veteran of Shakespeare and
Edward Albee
.
Michael Caine
"explained to me long ago why its easier for British actors to do American accents than the other way around. Whatever. You cant find a crack in his performance here."
These three embark on a road odyssey that feels like it takes longer than it might in real life. Their secrets are very slowly confided. They go through emotional relationships expected and not expected. They learn lessons about themselves, which is required in such films, but are so slowly and convincingly arrived at here that we forgive them. There is rarely a film where the characters are exactly the same at the end as they were at the beginning. Note: Being triumphant is not a character change.
Prasad made a wonderful British film in 1997, "
My Son the Fanatic
." I\ve seen none of his work since. Now comes this redneck slice of life. Since the characters are so far from the lives of the actors and the director, this is a creation of the imagination. As it must be. The ending is a shade melodramatic, but what the heck. In for one yellow handkerchief, in for a hundred.

It All Starts Today 2001 Cast
Philippe Torreton as Daniel
Maria Pitarresi as Valeria
Nadia Kaci as Samia
Directed by Bertrand Tavernier
Written by Dominique Sampiero
Tiffany Tavernier Tavernier
Drama, Foreign Rated NR
Suitable For Teens 117 minutes
Daniel, the kindergarten teacher in "It All Starts Today," finds himself doing a lot more than teaching. He is also expected to be a social worker, child abuse investigator, hot lunch provider, political activist, fund-raiser, administrator, son and lover, and now his girlfriend wants him to become a father as well.
Philippe Torreton
plays the role with a kind of desperate energy, relaxing only with the kids in the schoolroom and one night when he dances at a birthday party.
"There is not much good cheer in the town where he teaches, a depressed mining village in the very area of France that inspired Zolas great expose of mine conditions, Germinal . Today, the typical miner is more like Daniels dad, a broken figure who shuffles through the living room with his oxygen tank strapped to his back. Unemployment is widespread, government funds are lacking, and the mayor complains that schools and social services eat up his budget."
Not that the services are that good. Early in the film, Daniel locks out a social worker 
Nadia Kaci
 after she hangs up on him. Later they get to be friends, and bend a few rules to make things happen. But what can they do about the pathetic mother who pushes her baby carriage into the schoolyard to pick up her pre-schooler, collapses on the asphalt, and then runs away, leaving behind both her baby and her little girl? "She reeked of red wine," another teacher tells Daniel the French would note the color. He visits her home, to find that the power has been turned off. It is winter, and cold. It\s against the law to turn off a customer\s power in the winter, but the power company gets around that by turning it off in the autumn. This woman, her kids and her dispirited husband have no money, no hope, no plans.
The 1999 movie is a tender and passionate protest, not without laughter, by Bertrand Tavernier--a director who is not only gifted but honorable, and who since his debut with the wonderful "
The Clockmaker
" in 1973, has never put his hand to an unworthy film. He works all over the map, from the fantasy of "Death Watch" to the politics of "The Judge and the Assassin" to the character study "A Week\s Vacation" to the jazz biopic " \Round Midnight" to the heartbreaking "
Daddy Nostalgia
" and the angry "L.627," about the impossibility of being an effective drug cop.
"It All Starts Today," opening today at Facets, has most in common with "L.627." Both films are about talented professionals who are hamstrung by the French bureaucracy and driven to despair by the untidy lives of their citizen clients. The screenplay, written by Tavernier with his daughter Tiffany and a schoolteacher named
Dominique Sampiero
, works by looking at everyday challenges. What is Daniel to say, for example, when the schoolyard woman and her husband explain that their son has stopped coming to school because it is just too much effort for them to set the alarm and get him out of bed? Irresponsible? Or would you also be defeated by months without heat and light? The movie sketches Daniel\s run-ins with a world that seems determined to make it impossible for him to be a good kindergarten teacher. He is considered a trouble-maker, but what can he do? Consider the insufferable school inspector who advises him not to "move among groups" while teaching. "What should I do about the other three groups?" Daniel asks. "Make them self-reliant," advises the inspector, who obviously knows little about the self-reliance skills of 2- to 5-year-olds.
Maria Pitarresi
"plays Daniels girlfriend, a sculptor with a young son who resents him. Her character seems a little unlikely, especially when she dreams up the school fete that ends the film, with classrooms filled with sand and Berber tents made from sheets, and a schoolyard filled with a maze of brightly colored bottles. As the town band plays and the children dance, were aware that the upbeat ending changes absolutely nothing about the grim prospects for these kids when they someday look for work in this dying region. Theyll end up paralyzed in front of the TV, like their parents. No wonder two of the students are named Starsky and Hutch."

Box of Moonlight 1997 Cast
John Turturro as Al Fountain
Sam Rockwell as The Kid
Catherine Keener as Floatie Dupre
Lisa Blount as Purlene Dupre
Annie Corely as Deb Fountain
Written and Directed by Tom Dicillo
Comedy, Drama Rated R
For Language and Some Nudity 111 minutes
"Box of Moonlight" tells the story of a man who lost the key to living somewhere along the way. His name is Al Fountain, he\s an engineer on an out-of-town factory job, and the foreman describes him as "one of those guys who goes through life like a robot." His wife calls him "Mr. Clockwork" because he always does exactly what he says he will do, precisely when he says he will do it.
John Turturro
"plays Al as a sad and lonely Everyman, in white shirts and black slacks. When the factory job is eliminated and theyre paid their bonuses and sent home, he doesnt go home. He rents a car and stays in the area, and asks the motel clerk if hes ever heard of Splatchee Lake--a place he remembers being taken to when he was a kid. God knows if Al has ever been happy since."
"This is a man going through some kind of a crisis. He just got his first gray hair. He is beginning to see things backward: Water runs up into the tap, children pedal their bikes in reverse. He has commitments but no contacts; when he calls home, he doesnt even want to speak to his son, maybe because he has nothing to say to him or anyone else."
Splatchee Lake is a disappointment. An elderly couple tell him it\s filled up with formaldehyde: "You step in it and it\ll burn your feet off." It\s not only nature that fails him. Sex and religion don\t help, either; he makes a baffling call to a phone sex service, and meets a man who has seen a vision of Jesus in the flames on a billboard barbecue grill.
Then Al meets the Kid 
Sam Rockwell
, who wears a coonskin cap and lives in a clearing in the woods that he has decorated to resemble--oh, I dunno, a junkyard run by Daniel Boone. The Kid is a free spirit, who encourages Al to shoot at things and go to a bar and break the rules of society. Among the Kid\s possessions is a box of moonlight, although whether it has moonlight in it is a question to post alongside the details on the briefcase in "
Pulp Fiction
." Eventually a couple of young women 
Catherine Keener
and
Lisa Blount
 join the little camp in the clearing, and Al makes sweet love with one of them. That seems kind of unfair to his long-suffering wife 
Annie Corely
, but maybe it falls under the heading of therapy.
"Box of Moonlight" was written and directed by Tom DiCillo, a filmmaker with a streak of magic realism in him. His "Johnny Suede" starred
Brad Pitt
as a leftover 1950s icon. His next film, "Living in Oblivion," made fun of more or less the exact kind of whimsical little indie film "Box of Moonlight" is, but so what? The fact that he knows what he\s doing, and how close it is to parody, adds a smile to the material.
There isn\t a whole lot of story in "Box of Moonlight." The film works by setting up Al Fountain as a mope, and then hurling gobs of life at him. Some stick. Turturro is good for the role because he can play both speeds: defeated workingman and reawakened dreamer. People keep asking him, "Are you all right?" Too bad about Splatchee Lake.

Hocus Pocus 1993 Cast
Bette Midler as Winifred
Sarah Jessica Parker as Sarah
Kathy Najimy as Mary
Directed by Kenny Ortega
Comedy, Family, Fantasy, Holiday, Horror, Science Fiction Rated PG
93 minutes "Hocus Pocus" is a film desperately in need of self-discipline.
"Its one of those projects where you imagine everyone laughing and applauding each other after every scene, because theyre so convinced theyre wild and crazy guys. But watching the movie is like attending a party you werent invited to, and where you dont know anybody, and theyre all in on a joke but wont explain it to you."
The plot involves three witches who are hanged in Salem, Mass., 300 years ago, and their bodies are placed under a curse. At the same time, under conditions too bothersome to explain, a young boy is turned into an immortal cat. Flash forward 300 years, as the witches are resurrected at Halloween time in present-day America, and the cat is still hanging around, and modern characters including cute little Dani 
Thora Birch
" and Max Omri Katz become targets of the witches wrath."
The movie is filled with special effects, lots of them, as the witches fly around on brooms and vacuum cleaners, and the cat develops the ability to speak. But the effects, the characters and the plot are all tossed into a confusing cauldron in which there is great activity but little progress, and a lot of hysterical shrieking.
The witches are led by
Bette Midler
", who knows a good line of dialogue when she hears one, and must have suspected that she wasnt hearing many from this screenplay, because she goes into her hyper mode and tries to use noise as a substitute for acting. Her sidekicks, played by"
Sarah Jessica Parker
and
Kathy Najimy
, are more fortunate, in that they are given less to do. A story like this requires some kind of structure. Some sort of clean-cut goals to be won and fates to be avoided. Watching "Hocus Pocus," I had no doubt that the filmmakers had talked their way through the plot to their own satisfaction, without stopping to ask if it could be followed by an audience. This is the kind of movie where the characters keep reciting the rules and reminding each other of their supernatural realities, shrieking in alarm while we stare indifferently at the screen.
Of the film\s many problems, the greatest may be that all three witches are thoroughly unpleasant. They don\t have personalities; they have behavior patterns and decibel levels. A good movie inspires the audience to subconsciously ask, "Give me more!" The witches in this one inspired my silent cry, "Get me out of here!"

The Debt 2011 Cast
Helen Mirren as Rachel
Jesper Christensen as Vogel
Tom Wilkinson as Stefan
Ciaran Hinds as David
Sam Worthington as Young David
Jessica Chastain as Young Rachel
Marton Csokas as Young Stefan
Directed by John Madden
Written by Matthew Vaughn
Jane Goldman Peter Strongman
Assaf Bern Action, Crime, Drama, Thriller
Rated R for some violence and language
113 minutes "The Debt" weaves a tangled web of lies and deceptions around a seemingly heroic raid in 1965 carried out by three agents of Mossad, the Israeli intelligence agency known for more ability than it exhibits here. Their mission: Enter East Berlin with secret identities, kidnap a Nazi war criminal and bring him to Israel for trial. He is Vogel 
Jesper Christensen
, the notorious Surgeon of Birkenau, who conducted unspeakable procedures on his captives.
The film opens with the agents being welcomed on their return home to Israel. They are David 
Sam Worthington
, Rachel Singer 
Jessica Chastain
, of "
The Tree of Life
" and Stefan 
Marton Csokas
. In scenes set in 1997, they will be played by
Ciaran Hinds
,
Helen Mirren
and
Tom Wilkinson
". The later scenes involve the publication of a book about the famous raid by Rachels daughter."
Not everything in the book is quite as it seems. Recent developments in the Ukraine have cast doubt on the now legendary intelligence operation, which would cast the Mossad in the unfortunate light of either not knowing or not admitting what really happened in 1965. That\s intriguing for us, because "The Debt" does a splendid job of showing key early sequences in detail. To see is to believe. But we might not be seeing everything.
"Because the film jumps the rails toward the end, it might be worth mentioning the good parts. Rachel poses as a woman consulting the ex-Nazi gynecologist, who is now in Buenos Aries. Consider putting your feet in the stirrups for the Surgeon of Birkenau. Then theres an ingenious operation, which I will not describe, to spirit him out of his clinic and into captivity. Separately, elaborate timing is used to allow a border crossing at a closed Berlin transit station."
This stuff plays to the strength of cinema, underlining the details of each strategy and the dangers it involves. If you replay the actual events in your mind, you realize all the suspense is created with editing, camera angles and POV. Film considers time and space subjectively. Seen from a different perspective, there may be no telling what was really going on.
The architecture of "The Debt" has an unfortunate flaw. The younger versions of the characters have scenes that are intrinsically more exciting, but the actors playing the older versions are more interesting. Helen Mirren, Tom Wilkinson and Ciaran Hinds bring along the weight of their many earlier roles. To be sure, the older actors get some excitement of their own, but by then, the plot has lost its way.
Maybe the problem is a structure that cuts around in time. Three characters, six actors, and although the woman is always presumably Rachel, I was sometimes asking myself which of the two men I was seeing when younger. In a thriller, you must be sure. I suspect this movie would have been more effective if it had it remained entirely in the past, especially given all we know.

The Bourne Identity 2002 Cast
Matt Damon as Jason Bourne
Franka Potente as Marie
Chris Cooper as Ted Conklin
Clive Owen as The Professor
Brian Cox as Ward Abbott
Directed by Doug Liman
Written by Tony Gilroy
William Blake Herron Based on the novel by
Robert Ludlum Action, Drama, Mystery, Thriller
Rated PG-13 For Violence and Some Language
118 minutes "The Bourne Identity" is a skillful action movie about a plot that exists only to support a skillful action movie. The entire story is a set-up for the martial arts and chases. Because they are done well, because the movie is well-crafted and acted, we give it a pass. Too bad it\s not about something.
Well, perhaps it is. Perhaps it is about the amoral climate in spy agencies like the CIA. There are no good guys in the movie--certainly not the hero, played by
Matt Damon
, who is a trained assassin--and no bad guys, either. Even the people who want to kill Damon are only doing their jobs. Just as the guardians of the Navajo "
Windtalkers
" in another new movie are told to kill their charges rather than let them fall into enemy hands, so is Bourne, or whatever his name is, targeted for death after he fails to assassinate an African leader. There\s a good possibility he would also be targeted if he had succeeded. As the movie opens, a fisherman on a boat out of Marseilles spots a body floating in what is obviously a studio back-lot tank. Hauled aboard, the body turns out to be alive, to have two bullet wounds and to have a capsule embedded under the skin, which contains the code to a Swiss bank account. The friendly fisherman gives the rescued man who doesn\t remember who he is money to take the train to Switzerland, and he is welcomed in that nation and withdraws a fortune from a bank despite lacking a name or any form of personal identification.
Indeed, he finds out who he may be by looking inside the red bag from the bank, where he finds several passports, one saying his name is Bourne. Determined to find out his real name, and why he was floating in the Mediterranean, Bourne pays $10,000 to a gypsy named Marie 
Franka Potente
from "
Run Lola Run
" to drive him to Paris. Meanwhile, the movie cuts to CIA headquarters in Virginia, where we meet Bourne\s handler Conklin 
Chris Cooper
, and his boss Abbott 
Brian Cox
. Bourne was thought to be dead. Now that he is alive, he must be killed, and the assignment goes to a group of CIA killers, especially the Professor 
Clive Owen
, who is as highly trained as Bourne.
I forgot to say that Bourne is trained. Is he ever. He speaks several languages, is a formidable martial artist, has highly trained powers of observation and memory, knows all the spy tricks and is a formidable driver. We see that during a sensational chase scene through the streets of Paris, much of it through narrow alleys, down flights of steps, and against traffic.
"There comes a point at which we realize there will be no higher level to the screenplay, no greater purpose than to expend this kinetic energy. The movies brutally cynical happy ending reveals that it doesnt take itself seriously. And we catch on sooner than Marie that the girl stays in the picture only because--well, there has to be a girl, to provide false suspense and give the loner hero someone to talk to."
I kind of enjoyed "The Bourne Identity." I had to put my mind on hold, but I was able to. I am less disturbed by action movies like this, which are frankly about nothing, than by action movies like "Windtalkers," which pretend to be about something and then cop out.
Doug Liman
, the director of "Bourne," directs the traffic well, gets a nice wintry look from his locations, absorbs us with the movie\s spycraft and uses Damon\s ability to be focused and sincere. The movie is unnecessary, but not unskilled.

El Velador 2012 Directed by
Natalia Almada Foreign
Rated NR 72 minutes
"With visual purity and simplicity, the film centers on the routine of the night watchman, or el velador, of a fast-growing cemetery favored by Mexicos drug millionaires. It is the most fashionable address for the dead. During the day, the cemetery is a busy construction site, its laborers racing to keep up with the demand. At night, it becomes a ghostly necropolis."
"We follow a taciturn middle-aged man, whose name is never given. He arrives at dusk every day in a beat-up old truck and settles into the watchmans shack. Thrown together out of discarded building materials, the shack is surrounded by crypts two or three stories tall, which are topped by domes, floored with polished marble, decorated by statuary and invariably displaying photographs of their occupants — some holding automatic weapons."
Two faithful dogs materialize when the old truck arrives. They have appointed themselves as his companions, but the watchman never talks to them, feeds them or pets them. They are content with his company. At night, the watchman notes, gun battles can erupt between loyalists of various cartels, and sometimes there are bands and parties on the graves.
There is no narration and next to no spoken dialogue in the documentary, although from the watchman\s old TV set, we hear items on the news about the daily body count between drug dealers and police, drug dealers and the army, and drug dealers with one another. There is some excitement when the "boss of bosses" is shot down, but we understand there will immediately be a new boss of bosses.
"In the daytime, marching bands accompany coffins to their resting places. Mourners are joined by spectators, maybe even tourists. Vendors sell chilled mangoes and soft drinks. We see a widow who comes every day to wash and clean her husbands two-story crypt, while her children play hopscotch on the flat gravemarkers on the less prosperous side of the street."
What else is to be said? The watchman has a single naked light bulb, which he hangs above his door in the evening and moves inside at night. He sleeps under a couple of blankets on a plank supported by oil drums. The feet of the construction workers are bursting from splits in their shoes. The only prosperous ones here are the dead.

More 1969 Cast
Mimsy Farmer as Estelle
Michel Cahnderll as Charlie
Klaus Grunberg as Stefan
Henry Wolf as Henry
Heinz Engelmann as Wolf
Produced and directed by Barbet Schroeder
Drama, Foreign, Indie 117 minutes
Barbet Schroeder\s "More" is a weird, freaky movie about two hedonisitc kids who destroy themselves with drugs. More precisely, it\s about a kinky American girl who destroys her German boyfriend and in the process destroys herself. But why be precise? The boyfriend is played as such a stupid Teutonic slob we\re glad to see him die.
"More" is not, however, a lecture. It\s more of a celebration. The message seems to be: Sure, speed kills, but what a way to go. After some disorganized scenes in Europe, the two kids leave to spend the summer on a Mediterranean island. They lie nude in the sun forever, it seems; get involved in a Nazi intrigue that\s never made clear; experiment with pot, acid, speed, heroin and banana peels; make a little love; and engage in the most impossible menage a trois since Elsa the lion crawled into the tent.
"Alas, such happy times cant possibly last. When autumn comes, the boy has developed a heroin habit and kills himself with an overdose. But please dont blame me, this time, for giving away the ending. Were informed as the movie opens that the boy will die. Whats strange is that he narrates his own story, all the same. Even his funeral. I think English professors call that a flawed point of view."
The movie is very heavy on sunsets, sunrises, and sun in general. Schroeder doesn\t quite understand that turning on and basking in the sun is one thing, but having to watch it is another. The drug experience is basically internal, and no movie has really succeeded in reproducing it visually. Some, like "
The Trip
" 1967 and "
Easy Rider
," try to reproduce acid trips by messing around with the camera. That doesn\t work and gets boring after a while. "More," interestingly enough, never pretends to be inside the character\s heads. It watches the trips from outside. That\s a relief but not a solution.
The movie comes to us provincials, by the way, bearing a heavy weight of praise from New York critics who are apparently hard to bore. Perhaps Schroeder\s reputation preceded him; he\s an influential young critic for Cahlers du Cinema, and produced the anthology film "Six in Paris." But he is not yet very sure of himself, especially in the editing. Several passages are destroyed by nervous editing; the love scenes, in particular, seem truncated and uncertain.
That is not the fault, however, of
Mimsy Farmer
", who doesnt miss a one of them or allow us to miss much of her. Miss Farmer has previously been seen in cheap motorcycle pictures; it is a surprise to discover how well she can act."
Instead of playing the love scenes in the conventional American voluptuous and gasping style, she remains very freaky, brittle, and almost neurotically repressed during them. Her scenes are the best in the film. Unfortunately, there are a lot of other scenes that go nowhere, and we quickly get bored with the untalented
Klaus Grunberg
"as her German boyfriend. Even in the love scenes, hes only following orders."

Jack & Sarah 1996 Cast
Richard E. Grant as Jack
Samantha Mathis as Amy
Judi Dench as Margaret
Ian McKellen as William
Written and Directed by Tim Sullivan
Comedy, Drama, Foreign, Romance Rated R
For Some Language 110 minutes
We begin with the presence of
Richard E. Grant
. He smiles but is somehow shifty. He doesn\t seem like a leading man in a comedy about raising a baby. He isn\t smooth, dependable and cuddly. He is, in fact, edgy and short-tempered,and appallingly self-centered. No Hollywood casting director would think twice before rejecting him for the lead in "Jack & Sarah." That is why he makes such an interesting choice, and why the movie rises above its formula origins to become perversely interesting.
You may have seen Grant before, although his name may not come immediately to mind. He was the co-star of "Withnail & I" 1987, as a desperately bitter, angry, unemployed actor. In "
How to Get Ahead in Advertising
" 1989, his misery was so great that it produced a boil on his shoulder that eventually developed a mind of its own. In "
The Player
," "
"Bram Stokers Dracula"
" and "
The Age of Innocence
," he played varieties of ominous twits. Not, in other words, the kind of warm-hearted,
Hugh Grant
ish, Dudley Moorish, Richard Dreyfussian lead you would expect in a movie about a selfish egotist who learns to love.
Why is Grant not the expected choice? His face is too long. His eyes are too frank. His mouth is too wry. These are, of course, excellent attributes for an actor, and will give him longevity; Richard Grant will be playing intriguing roles long after Hugh Grant has been consigned to kindly godfathers. But they are not qualities we associate with fuzzy parent figures.
"Grant has, in fact, received some negative reviews for this film--mostly, I think, because he forces viewers to come to terms with him, instead of allowing them to settle into a comfortable cocoon of mindless sitcom reassurance. His presence forces the movie to be about something other than its cliches, which are many, and by the end I had become involved in his characters struggle to become a nice person."
Grant plays Jack, a London lawyer who snarls at the workmen rehabbing his home, gets into an ill-advised fight with someone clamping his car or, as we say here, getting the Denver Boot and is so intense and competitive that during a natural childbirth class with his pregnant wife 
Imogen Stubbs
 he goes into sympathetic labor. Soon it is time for the baby to be born, an event he misses, having fallen down the stairs and gone unconscious to the hospital in the same ambulance as his wife.
"It is not betraying too much of the plot, I hope, to reveal that Sarah dies in childbirth. This happens very early on, as a setup for the central plot, which involves Jacks struggle to become a good parent, love his little daughter Sarah, and transform himself into an acceptable human being."
He is assisted in this struggle by Amy 
Samantha Mathis
", an American working as a waitress in London; he rescues her from her restaurant and hires her to be Sarahs nanny. And he is helped by William "
Ian McKellen
, an alcoholic derelict who cleans himself up nicely and more or less appoints himself the household butler. Assorted grandparents also come into the picture, particularly those wonderful actresses
Judi Dench
, as his mother, and
Eileen Atkins
, as his stepmother. They dote on little Sarah, and hope Jack will become a good father--if such a thing is possible.
"If you muse a bit on the characters Ive described, you will no doubt be able to fashion a very good guess about what eventually happens. Thats why Richard Grant is so important to the movie. The screenplay, by"
Tim Sullivan
who also directs, is straight off the assembly line. But by casting against type, by finding an actor whose very presence insists he is not to be disregarded, the movie works in spite of its conventions. Grant makes general scenes into particular ones, and adds suspense by generating doubt about whether his character will respond according to formula. "Jack & Sarah" is almost perverse in the way it backs into its cheerful outcome; first the heart transplant, then the heart.

They Call Me Bruce? 1982 Action, Comedy, Thriller
Rated PG 88 minutes
"One thing you notice right away about kung fu heroes is that they dont talk much. Theyre men of action. They exchange a couple of curt words:"
You have offended my honor!
Ha! Ha! Now I will kill you!
And then they lay into each other with fists, feet, elbows and fingernails. Even in the early scenes, when they\re setting up the plot, they keep the dialogue to an absolute minimum. The heroic kung fu expert goes to the temple to talk to a long-bearded Master, who says something like, "The students of Wong have offended the honor of the temple!" And then the hero replies, "Ha! Ha! Now I will kill them!"
"The reason for the scarcity of dialogue in most kung fu movies is easy to explain. Theyre mass-produced in Hong Kong and shipped all over the world. The fewer words, the less the dubbing will cost."
The makers of "
They Call Me Bruce
" aren\t aiming for a global audience. They\re making a spoof of kung-fu movies for the same American audiences that went to "
Airplane!
," "
Airplane II - The Sequel
" and "Jekyll & Hyde... Together Again." That allows them to go long on dialogue and short on action, and in the process they lose their whole satirical edge.
"They Call Me Bruce" does have a few funny action scenes, a very few, but most of the time its humor depends on puns and other weak witticisms from
Johnny Yune
, who plays its hero. Yune is also credited with helping to write the screenplay -- and I can believe that, since a lot of his dialogue sounds like it was made up on the spot.
The plot is cheerfully idiotic. The Mafia wants to ship some cocaine from the West Coast to New York, disguised as a special brand of Oriental flour. So the top Mafioso assigns his Chinese cook, Bruce, to carry the dope East, escorted by a trusty chauffeur. Along the way, they get into the usual adventures, including run-ins with mobsters in Vegas and Chicago. In a touching bit of local color, the movie includes stock shots of Lake Shore Drive and South Wabash to establish its Chicago locations, even though all the scenes with Johnny Yune are shot indoors.
"Yunes character is a blissful idiot, a"
Jerry Lewis
retread who specializes in bad puns. Sample: "If you knew sushi, like I know sushi." He has his funny moments, though, especially in flashback memories to the wise old Master. "Always remember, son, kick them in the groin!"
The real problem with "They Call Me Bruce" is that it\s a satire of a nearly satire-proof genre. Real kung-fu movies are so implausible and so inane that it\s hard to make a satire that doesn\t simply cover the same ground.

The Man Who Knew Too Little 1997 Cast
Bill Murray as Wallace Ritchie
Peter Gallagher as James Ritchie
Joanne Whalley as Lori
Alfred Molina as Boris
Directed by Jon Amiel
Written by Robert Farrar
Howard Franklin Comedy, Crime, Thriller
Rated PG-13 For Language, Innuendo, Comic Violence and Sensuality
95 minutes The funniest thing about "The Man Who Knew Too Little\\ is the title; that melancholy truth that develops with deadening finality as the movie marches on. The movie develops endless permutations on an idea that is not funny, until at last, in desperation, we cry, "Bring on some dancing Cossacks!\\ and it does.
Bill Murray
stars as Wallace, a clueless American tourist, visiting London to see his brother 
Peter Gallagher
. The brother is a banker throwing a big business dinner, so to get rid of Wallace, he buys him a ticket to the "Theater of Life,\\ a troupe that works on the city streets and involves one audience member at a time in a real-life drama.
Wallace, alas, answers a pay phone at the wrong time, and finds himself involved in a real spy drama instead of a fake theatrical one. This leads to no end of misunderstandings, and when I say "no end,\\ please assume a tone of despair mixed with exhaustion.
The movie is simply not funny. It is clever, yes. Based on a book by
Robert Farrar
, it concocts conversations that all have the same thing in common: They can be taken both ways. So Wallace means one thing and the spies think he means another, and on and on and on and on and on.
"When he is funny, Bill Murray is very funny. But he needs something to push against. He is a reactor. His best screen characters are passive-aggressive: They insinuate themselves unwanted into ongoing scenarios. Here hes the center of the show, and all of the other characters are carefully tailored to fit precisely into the requirements of his misunderstanding, like pieces of a jigsaw puzzle."
"There are sequences here dripping with desperation, like the whole business involving the window ledge. The dancing Cossack scene involves many Chinese dolls, one containing a bomb with a red digital readout RDR. Here is a movie gasping for diversions, and does it think of any gags involving the RDR? It does not. It never even clearly establishes how we can see the RDR, since it is inside the doll. Or maybe sound of critics palm smacking against forehead thats the joke."

Bandits 2001 Cast
Bruce Willis as Joe
Cate Blanchett as Kate
Billy Bob Thornton as Terry
Troy Garity as Harvey
Directed by Barry Levinson
Written by Harley Peyton
Action, Comedy, Crime, Romance Rated PG-13
For Some Sexual Content, Language and Violence 123 minutes
"“Bandits” is a movie so determined to be clever and whimsical that it neglects to be anything else. That decision wouldnt be fatal if the movie had caved in and admitted it was a comedy, but, no, it also wants to contain moments of pathos, suspense and insight, and its too flimsy to support them. Its an anthology of unrelated tones; individual scenes may play well, but seem unaware of the movie theyre in. And the love triangle never decides if its romance or romantic comedy. If the movie wont commit, why should we? Its rare for a movie to have three such likable characters and be so unlikeable itself."
Bruce Willis
and
Billy Bob Thornton
"star, as “Americas most famous bank robbers,” and"
Cate Blanchett
"is Kate, the executives wife who starts as their hostage and becomes their lover. Yes, both of them or neither of them; the PG-13 movie is cagey about what happens in between those knocks on the motel room doors. She cant choose. She likes Joe Willis because hes brave, strong and handsome, and Terry Thornton because hes sensitive and cute."
"Thorntons character is the jewel--a neurotic, fearful hypochrondiac who is lactose intolerant, hears a ringing in his ears, suffers from psychosomatic paralysis, and has a phobia about antique furniture. You never know whats real and what theyre making up in the movies; Thornton has a real-life phobia about antique furniture, in fact, and almost had a meltdown once during a visit to Johnny Cashs antiques-filled home. The plot: The partners break out of prison after Joe steals a cement truck, and theres a nice shot of it plowing its way through suburban back yards. Terry comes up with the idea of taking bank managers hostage in their homes the night before a job, so they can get into the bank before business hours in the morning. They steal a lot of loot, become celebrities, and stay on the loose for an amazing length of time, considering their driver, lookout and “outside man” is Joes moronic cousin Harvey "
Troy Garity
, who dreams of being a stunt man.
The movie, directed by
Barry Levinson
and written by
Harley Peyton
"“Twin Peaks”, is told in a flashback and actually begins with the news that the two men have been shot dead after a failed hostage situation. Cut to a tabloid TV show whose host got an exclusive interview shortly before the final shootout; Joe and Terry narrate their career, try to justify themselves, and say Kate was an innocent hostage and not a fellow criminal. Eventually the film works its way back to the fatal robbery it began with, and to the classic line, “The suspects are in a shootout with themselves.” The film has laughs sprinkled here and there. I liked the way the confused Terry asks Joe, “Whats on our mind?” And the way Kates preoccupied husband, a self-involved hotshot, goes on TV to tell the kidnapped woman: “Im going to Spain next week. If the kidnappers want to reach me, they can get in touch with my people.” And I liked the jolly little fireplug of a bank manager who is delighted to meet the “Sleepover Bandits” in person, but cannot take them seriously."
"Problem is, the movie doesnt commit to any of the several directions in which it meanders. Is the romantic triangle poignant, or a gimmick? Do the guys joke and make small talk during robberies because this is a comedy, or because they are pathological narcissists? The flashback structure is an annoyance, and by the time it is justified, its too late: Weve already been annoyed. One of the joys of Barry Levinsons “Wag The Dog” 1997 was the way he juggled tones, moving from satire to suspense to politics. This time its the audience who feels juggled."

The Red Machine 2010 Adventure, Crime, Drama
Rated Unrated 84 minutes
"The Red Machine" is a lean, intense thriller about a disgraced spy for the U.S. Navy and a jailed safecracker who team up to steal the secret of the Japanese version of Enigma, the Nazi cryptography machine. It’s set in Washington, D.C., in the 1930s when Japan and the United States still had diplomatic relations, and the target is a red cipher machine.
Something happened to Lt. F. Ellis Coburn Lee Perkins in Tokyo seven years earlier to turn him into the man we see. He looks to be a flawlessly turned-out Navy officer, but he’s locked behind a stone face and a reputation all his superiors know about. In a climate of expanding promotions as the Navy prepares for war, everyone notices he’s stuck at lieutenant.
Eddie Doyle Donal Thoms-Cappello is a cocky young thief straight from a 1930s pulp crime magazine. He approaches his craft as a science, noiselessly breaking and entering, breaking combinations, slipping into the night. He can pick locks and pockets, and works within a tight criminal fraternity ruled by Stella Snyder Maureen Byrnes, a wise-talking hard-core case.
Navy intelligence has broken all the Japanese codes but this one. The Red Machine baffles them. They assign Coburn to the task because of his undoubted skills and get Eddie released from jail for his particular specialty. Eddie will get them into the guarded embassy, and when Coburn sees the machine, he’ll know what he’s looking at. The machine itself can’t be stolen; the Japanese must never suspect it has been compromised.
The drama also involves the Japanese ambassador Shimada Eddie Lee and his wife Naomi Madoka Kasahara, who, almost inevitably, have links to the mysterious events in Tokyo seven years ago. And that’s about it. These people, this stage, the red machine.
The movie, written and directed by the married pair of Stephanie Argy and Alec Boehm, doesn’t fall back on stunts, chases or extended gun battles; it’s in the honorable tradition of the heist movie. That involves blueprints, plans and the need to be very, very quiet. There’s a nice scene when a safe is opened just behind an open door in Shimada’s office. Coburn becomes so desperate to stall that he plays every card in his hand, including personal secrets.
“The Red Machine” is deeper than it first seems. The plot has hidden levels, and so do the characters, particularly the unlikely team of Doyle and Coburn. They don’t like each other and don’t like working together, and any possible personal progress is shut down by Coburn’s fearsome reserve. He is taciturn to the point of aggression.
Neither actor overplays. Perkins’ role doesn’t allow him. Thoms-Cappello’s thief is supposed to be brash and dubious, which he is, but within reason. There’s some subtle shifting going on that the directors suggest with visuals, not dialogue; an unspoken agreement to conspire takes place below the surface.
Here’s a film with an elegant simplicity. Not a shot doesn’t do its work. It may remind you of a ’40s B crime movie, and I mean that as a compliment. When you don’t have a lot of explosions and special effects to exploit, you have to turn to the imagination — yours, and the audience’s.

Billion Dollar Brain 1968 Cast
Michael Caine as Harry Palmer
Karl Malden as Leo Newbegin
Francoise Dorleac as Signe
Ed Begley as Gen. Midwinter
Action, Adventure, Drama, Foreign, Thriller 111 minutes
The hippies say you should do your own thing. Movies should too. We don\t go to a Western expecting "
Citizen Kane
," but we do hope for a good Western. If we\re disappointed, It\s not because the movie wasn\t a masterpiece but because it wasn\t a Western.
Same goes for spy movies, detective movies, musicals, the "Carry on Nurse" series and just about every other form not meant to be taken as art. A Western should either BE a Western, or it should demonstrate that it knows how not to be one, like "
El Dorado
," in which
John Wayne
,
Robert Mitchum
and
Howard Hawks
old Western pros all made fun of a form they know and love. What is fatal is a Western that doesn\t know how to be a Western or anything else, like the dreadful "A Stranger in Town."
"Billion Dollar Brain" falls in the fatal category: it is a spy movie that commits the unforgivable sin of losing track of its plot.
"How can you take it seriously when the spys mission is never made clear? When, through faulty scripting or editing, the characters greet people they arent supposed to know? When the Russian spy is killed by his own guys, and yet he didnt do anything wrong? When you cant quite get it straight what the threat to Western civilization is this time, and how the spy is going to save us? When you wonder if maybe the projectionist didnt forget to show one reel?"
If a spy movie is going to work, you have to understand it. "The Spy Who Came in From the Cold," for example, successfully explained a triple cross. The spy movie "
Triple Cross
," on the other hand, did not. In the first of the Harry Palmer series, "The Ipcress File," these conditions were met. Palmer 
Michael Caine
 was involved with two double agents, and at the moment when they cornered him in the warehouse and he had to decide, quick, which one was really on his side, the audience could share his danger because they understood it.
Not so in "Billion Dollar Brain," the third film in which Caine plays Palmer. For one thing, we never get to know Palmer this time. He still has the mild Cockney accent, but he\s lost his sense of humor and his love for the little things of life, like cooking. He\s a big-shot spy now, like Bond and Flint, and who needs another one of those?
One bright spot. The movie gets better, not worse, toward the end. After swimming in a morass of confusion for over an hour, we finally get to meet the Texas oil millionaire 
Ed Begley
" whos masterminding the scheme, and Begley, turns in a biting, hilarious parody of right-wing oil millionaires. But he never explains the scheme."

Crimson Tide 1995 Cast
Denzel Washington as Hunter
Gene Hackman as Ramsey
Matt Craven as Zimmer
George Dzundza as Cob
Directed by Tony Scott
Written by Michael Schiffer
Based On Based On A Story by
Schiffer Action, Thriller
Rated R For Strong Language
116 minutes There\s an early scene in "Crimson Tide" when the\rcharacters are playing a trivia game, remembering the stars of early submarine\rmovies like "Run Silent, Run Deep." It\s clever, showing how the crew\rmembers of the U.S. nuclear submarine Alabama have formed many of their images\rof the silent service at the movies.
It\s\ralso daring: This movie is inviting comparison with the classics, and although\rit doesn\t mention "
Das Boot
" or "The Hunt for Red\rOctober," it could have: This movie is in the same skillful tradition.
The\rtradition includes a strong commander, and the Alabama possesses a legend:\rCapt. Ramsey 
Gene Hackman
, who trained under the legendary Adm. Hyman\rRickover, father of the nuclear submarine, and is now nearing the end of his\ractive duty. Ramsey, known for chewing up subordinates, is also famous for his\rlittle dog, a
Jack Russell
terrier that is allowed to lift its little leg\rwherever it pleases.
As\rthe movie opens, the Alabama gets a new second in command: Lt. Cmdr. Hunter\r
Denzel Washington
. In an early interview with Ramsey, the old-timer strikes a\rvaguely sinister note; Hackman is a master at seeming genial and friendly while\rmasking deeper, darker thoughts. The sub sets out to sea, and during a\rdiscussion around the dinner table, Hunter makes the mistake of telling Ramsey,\r"In my humble opinion, in the nuclear world the true enemy is war\ritself." These words will haunt him. Ramsey tests the younger man,and when a fire breaks out in the\rsubmarine\s galley, the captain chooses that moment to order an onboard drill.\rHunter questions the decision, saying he would have attended to the fire first,\rbefore calling a drill. Ramsey says he saw the fire as an opportunity to test\rthe ability of his men to function under chaotic conditions.
And,\rhe adds, while the junior officer is free to disagree, he should never do so in\rfront of the enlisted men: "We\re here to preserve democracy, not to\rpractice it." A coded message is received. Russian rebel troops have\rseized control of nuclear missile silos, and the Alabama is placed on full war\ralert. Its job, if it receives a verified command message, will be to fire its\rnuclear missiles at the land-based targets in a preemptive strike. Meanwhile,\rin an exchange of missiles with an enemy sub, the Alabama\s radio apparatus is\rtemporarily disabled, but not before a confirmed message has been received that\rorders the sub to ready its missiles for firing.
Now\rdeep silence reigns beneath the ocean. The sub, cut off from its chain of\rcommand, may be the only deterrent to a Russian nuclear attack. Should the\rcaptain seize the initiative and order a launch? He can do that only if his\rsecond-in-command agrees, and Hunter doesn\t. That\s the basic set-up in\r"Crimson Tide," an uncommonly intelligent dramatization about the\rchoices, dangers and duties of nuclear warfare.
The\rmovie has the usual trappings of submarine adventure pictures: emergency\rflooding, near-hits, the danger of sinking below a safe depth. Director Tony\rScott "
Top Gun
" handles these scenes with skill, and yet they\re\rnot at the heart of Michael Schiffer\s screenplay. Instead, the movie develops\ralong ideological lines, as Ramsey and Hunter - both absolutely convinced\rthey\re right - attempt to gain control of the submarine. Is the captain guilty\rof a procedural violation, or is his second in command guilty of mutiny? Oddly\renough, "Crimson Tide" develops into an actors\ picture, not just an\raction movie. There are a lot of special effects, high-tech gadgets and violent\rstandoffs, yes, but the movie is really a battle between two wills. Hackman and\rWashington are well-matched, and although my sympathies were with the\rWashington character faced with the prospect of a billion deaths, it is best\rto err on the side of caution, I could understand the logic of the senior\rofficer. Hackman\s Ramsey is not a warmonger or a mad dog, but an officer so\robsessed with following orders that even an incomplete one has a message, just\rfor him.
In\ra large supporting cast,
George Dzundza
"stands out as Cob, the officer who must\rside with Hunter or Ramsey, and who places proper procedure higher than his\ropinion of either mans position."
"His\rbest scene comes as he monitors a depth gauge that shows the Alabama sinking to\rhull-crushing pressures. As it appears inevitable that the sub will be\rdestroyed, he makes an interesting actors choice: Instead of allowing his\rvoice to grow tense or exciting, he flattens it into a disinterested monotone\rof resignation. That works even better to underline the tension."
What\s\runique about "Crimson Tide" is that it doesn\t offer clear-cut\rchoices between good and evil. Hackman may be violating procedures, but perhaps\rhe has good reasons. Washington, fearing to unleash war, may leave his country\runprotected.
"Even\rthe ending is intriguingly even-handed. This is the rare kind of war movie that\rnot only thrills people while theyre watching it, but invites them to leave\rthe theater actually discussing the issues."

Aileen: Life and Death of a Serial Killer 2004 Directed by
Nick Broomfield Joan Churchill
Documentary, Drama Rated NR
90 minutes "Aileen: Life and Death of a Serial Killer" is a documentary by
Nick Broomfield
, the guerrilla filmmaker who works with a crew of one cinematographer and co-director
Joan Churchill
 and structures his films into the stories of how he made them. He met Aileen, invariably described as "America\s first female serial killer," soon after her original arrest, and made the 1992 documentary "Aileen Wuornos: The Selling of a Serial Killer" about the media zoo and bidding war that surrounded her sudden notoriety. Florida police were fired after it was disclosed they were negotiating for a Hollywood deal, and Aileen, meanwhile, was represented by "Dr. Legal," a bearded, pot-smoking ex-hippie who was incompetent and clueless. She saw his ad on late-night TV. She couldn\t pay him, but he figured he could cash in, too.
"As Wuornos often-delayed execution date inexorably closed in, Broomfield returned to the story for this film, made in 2002. He had become friendly, if that is the word, with Aileen, and indeed she gave him her last interview. He also interviewed many people instrumental in her life, including childhood friends, former sexual partners and even her long-lost mother. The portrait he builds of her life is one of cruel suffering and mistreatment. This was a young woman who hitchhiked to Florida when she was 13 because she was tired of sleeping in the rough, and who became a roadside prostitute because, really, what else was open to her? Social services? Invisible, in her case."
Wuornos herself is onscreen for much of the film.
Charlize Theron
has earned almost unanimous praise for her portrayal of Aileen in the current film "
Monster
," and her performance stands up to direct comparison with the real woman. There were times, indeed, when I perceived no significant difference between the woman in the documentary and the one in the feature film. Theron has internalized and empathized with Wuornos so successfully that to experience the real woman is only to understand more completely how remarkable Theron\s performance is.
Wuornos talks and talks and talks to Broomfield. She confesses and recants. She says at one point that her original defense she was raped and attacked by her victims, and shot them in self-defense was a lie -- that she was in the "stealing biz" and killed them to cover her tracks. On another day she is likely to return to her original story. We hear her describing a man who tortured her with acid in a Visine bottle, and her vivid details make us feel we were there. Then she tells Broomfield she made it all up. What can we believe? Broomfield\s theory is that after more than a decade on Death Row, Wuornos was insane, and that she used her last remaining shreds of reason to hasten the day of her execution. She said whatever she thought would speed her date with death.
Oh, yes, it\s clear she was crazy on the day she died. She talks to Broomfield about secret signals and radio waves being beamed into her cell, about how the police knew she was the killer but let her keep on killing, because it would make a better story for them to sell, about how she would be beamed up "like on \Star Trek\" to a spaceship waiting for her in earth orbit.
Remarkably, three psychiatrists "examined" her right before her death and found her sane. No person who sees this film would agree with them. Florida Gov. Jeb Bush was scarcely less enthusiastic about the death penalty than his brother George, who supported the notorious execution assembly line in Texas. Aileen died in October of an election year, just in time to send a law-and-order message to the voters. Should she have died? That depends on whether you support the death penalty. She was certainly guilty. The film makes it clear the imprisonment would simply have continued a lifelong sentence that began when she was born. No one should have to endure the life that Aileen Wuornos led, and we leave the movie believing that if someone, somehow, had been able to help that little girl, her seven victims would never have died.

Bullitt 1968 Cast
Steve McQueen as Bullitt
Robert Vaughn as Chalmers
Jacqueline Bisset as Cathy
Don Gordon as Delgetti
Robert Duvall as Weissberg
Simon Oakland as Capt. Bennett
Norman Fell as Baker
production "Philip DAntoni"
Directed by Peter Yates
From a screenplay by Alan R. Trustman
Screenplay by Harry Kleiner
Photographed by William A. Fraker
Action, Crime, Drama, Thriller Rated PG
113 minutes Steve McQueen
is sometimes criticized for only playing "himself" in the movies. This misses the boat, I think. Stars like McQueen, Bogart, Wayne or Newman aren\t primarily actors, but presences. They have a myth, a personal legend they\ve built up in our minds during many movies, and when they try to play against that image it usually looks phony.
McQueen was a bomb as Thomas Crown, for example, because the character clashed with McQueen\s own personality. But McQueen is great in "Bullitt," and the movie is great, because director
Peter Yates
understands the McQueen image and works within it. He winds up with about the best action movie of recent years.
McQueen plays a San Francisco cop assigned as bodyguard to a syndicate witness. The witness gets shotgunned -- in the most brutally direct 10 seconds of film I can remember -- and McQueen becomes a political football.
Robert Vaughn
"better than usual is the politician who puts the heat on, and its up to McQueen to hide the victims body until he can untangle the case."
It\s a very tangled case, too. The beautiful thing is that Yates and his writers keen everything straight. There\s nothing worse than a\r\ncomplicated plot that loses track of itself as in "The Lady in Cement," which I defy anyone to explain.
"Bullitt" is Yates second film; his first was "
Robbery
," a superior movie about England\s great train robbery, which played Chicago earlier this year. "Robbery" had a great chase sequence in it, involving a running machine gun battle, all sorts of near misses in heavy traffic, lots of blood and remarkable photography.
"Bullitt," as everybody has heard by now, also includes a brilliant chase scene. McQueen doing his own driving is chased by, and chases, a couple of gangsters up and down San Francisco\s hills. They slam into intersections, bounce halfway down the next hill, scrape by half a dozen near-misses, sideswipe each other, and leave your stomach somewhere in the basement for about 11 minutes.
"One trouble. They couldnt be satisfied with a cop movie, I guess; they had to have sex appeal, and so they brought in"
Jacqueline Bisset
"a lovely sight, true to be McQueens girl. And every line she recites is disastrously inappropriate. She has one speech so awful it takes the movie five minutes to recover."
Yates pulled the same trick in "Robbery" 1968, giving
Stanley Baker
"a wife he didnt need so the movie could have three unnecessary scenes with her. And"
Lee Remick
cluttered up "
The Detective
." And Inga Stevens was extra baggage in "Madigan." They ought to leave the girls out or make them policewomen, like "
"Coogans Bluff"
" did, come to think of it.

A Little Romance 1979 Cast
Laurence Olivier as Julius
Diane Lane as Lauren
Thelonious Bernard as Daniel
Arthur Hill as Richard
Sally Kellerman as Kay
Broderick Crawford as Brod
David Dukes as George
Andrew Duncan as Bob
Comedy, Drama, Family, Romance Rated PG
108 minutes "A Little Romance" has been described as a movie about the way kids behave when adults aren\t looking. I think it\s quite the opposite: A movie about the way kids behave when adults are looking - and when adults are writing the dialog and directing the action, too. It gives us two movie kids in a story so unlikely I assume it was intended as a fantasy. And it gives us dialog and situations so relentlessly cute we want to squirm.
Yet I have a notion this is exactly the movie
George Roy Hill
wanted to make. Hill is one of the most successful directors in modern Hollywood history - his hits include "
Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid
" and "
The Sting
" - and he\s great at clever stories with big stars. So of course he goes to Paris and Verona and Venice to film a "little" story about early adolescence, one intended to impress us with its humanity, the purity of its intentions, its natural humor.
Francois Truffaut
covered this ground in "
The 400 Blows
," and
Louis Malle
in "
Murmur of the Heart
," and they did it by giving us characters who were seen with absolute clarity, who were no better and no worse than your usual pre-gangling 13-year-old, and who seemed plausible. "A Little Romance" would like to do that, I suspect, but it covers its bets by making its kids impossibly bright and witty and wise, and putting them in a story that not for one instant can be believed.
"The boy kid is the son of a Parisian taxi driver. He is also an obsessive movie buff, and has even taught himself English by going to American movies. I suppose one could learn English that way. If only the movies in French neighborhood theaters werent dubbed into French. The girl kid is an American whose mother is between husbands number three and four. The two kids meet, talk solemnly about subjects big and little, and fall in love. Both kids have IQs in the genius range, of course, which explains why they talk like fairly intelligent high school juniors."
The parents, of course, disapprove: The children are too young, they come from different countries, they have different socioeconomic backgrounds, blah, blah. The movie sees the kids, of course, as infinitely insightful about the adults and yet curiously devoid of the hang-ups that being raised by these parents should have supplied. The adults see the kids as total mysteries.
All the adults, that is, except one, who takes them under his wing and provides a sentimental sponsor for their romance. His name Is Julius Edmond Santorin, he describes himself as a former diplomat, he is in fact a practicing pickpocket, and he is played by Sir
Laurence Olivier
. It is not a very effective performance, for which we should probably not blame Sir Laurence.
"He is required to do the impossible: To be convincing as he supplies insights and sympathy during those moments when the movie tries to take its characters realistically, and yet to be fanciful enough to endorse a scheme in which the three of them will run away to Venice. The young lovers want to kiss for the first time under the Bridge of Sighs. Needless to say. Their flight to Italy includes such uh-huh moments as when theyre able to steal bikes during a bicycle race. Do you have any notion of what French bicycle racers do to people who steal their bicycles?"
"Its hard to say when we first begin to squirm. Maybe when we realize that the film sometimes actually takes itself seriously - that Hill and his collaborators think theyre combining the elements of would-be human comedy with a more serious view of adult hypocrisy. Maybe pure unadulterated cuteness is easier to take than cuteness interrupted by insights."
The kids are played by
Thelonious Bernard
and
Diane Lane
, who are really pretty good, if you can separate how they act from what they\re acting in. It\s not their fault "A Little Romance" is about two 13-year-olds who could exist only in fiction, and whose witty one-liners often sound as if they were authored by a writer for The
Mary Tyler Moore
"Show as, Indeed, they were. These are attractive kids and they look interesting. I wonder what they talked about between takes, and how they acted when the cameras werent rolling. There might be a movie there somewhere."

Les Miserables 1995 Cast
Michel Boujenah as H. Ziman
Alessandra Martines as Madame Ziman
Annie Girardot "as Farmers Wife"
Written, Directed, Produced and Photographed by Claude Lelouch
Drama, Romance Rated R
For Violence, Brief Language and Sexuality 174 minutes
Books reach some readers at the very core; they influence the way their lives are lived, and the way they see themselves. "Les Miserables" is a film about such a book and reader and, because it is long and sprawling like Victor Hugo\s 1862 novel, is about many other things as well. It contains scenes drawn from the novel, modern scenes that parallel the novel, and scenes which, strictly speaking, have nothing to do with the novel, including a great deal of material about the Nazi occupation of France and the persecution of the Jews.
The movie is not an adaptation of the long-running stage musical that has its own film version announced more or less annually, so far without result. This "Les Miserables" has been written, produced and directed by
Claude Lelouch
, who uses the legendary
Jean-Paul Belmondo
", now 63, in several modern roles, and even that of Hugos hero Jean Valjean. Because the settings behind each story are so different, Belmondo doesnt resort to makeup tricks to change character, but simply portrays them, somehow projecting their different personalities onto his famously elastic face."
The result is a work that gives meaning to the word "epic." Shot in generous widescreen and running for almost three hours, the movie is a universe with room to move around in. It begins in 1900 with a story loosely inspired by Hugo\s Valjean, who was imprisoned for stealing a loaf of bread. In the more modern version, a chauffeur Belmondo is wrongly accused of the death of his aristocratic employer, who committed suicide. He is imprisoned, and while his family starves and his wife is driven to prostitution, the chauffeur attempts to escape in a series of heartbreaking scenes, including one in which he swims an underwater passage and climbs a well, only to have to make an instant decision about his fate.
"The chauffeurs son, Roger Fortin, grows up to be a boxer, becomes the French champion, and later drives his own moving van."
"Meanwhile, we meet the Zimans, a Paris lawyer and his ballerina wife, who are married in the 1930s and linger too long in France before trying, as Jews, to escape the Nazi occupation. Eventually they are in the cab of Fortins moving van, their possessions in the back, and Ziman has persuaded the former boxer to drive them to the Swiss border by promising to read Les Miserables to him. Fortin cannot read, but once saw a film version of the story, and loves it. Fortin is not, when we meet him, anything more than a former boxer who drives a moving van. But he has a vivid imagination and is able to see himself as Jean Valjean, and soon we do, too, because Lelouch intercuts scenes from the historical novel, also using Belmondo. Gradually, in a transformation that is one of the most intriguing uses of literature I have seen in the movies, Fortin begins to absorb some of the heroism and liberalism of the Hugo character, and becomes a hero himself."
"The movies World War II sequences play like separate short stories. There is the non-relationship of Madame Ziman, now a Nazi prisoner, with the German officer who fancies her, accepts her rejection, and later helps her escape. And Zimans own bizarre adventure, when he is hidden in a cellar by a farmer and his wife, and pays them from his Swiss bank account. Reluctant to stop collecting his money, they do not tell him when the war ends."
The film is a wealth of incident: boxing matches, prison escapes, overland chases, a train robbery, high society, low crimes.
And the postwar sequel makes a pointed comment on the fact that some French collaborated with the Nazis, some did not, and in the postwar years justice was not always properly distributed among them.
What I liked about "Les Miserables" was the expansive freedom and energy of its storytelling. Lelouch, like Hugo, Dickens, Balzac and the other great 19th century novelists, is not riveted to a central story line, but proceeds in the general direction of his conclusion while freely allowing himself side excursions to characters and incidents that catch his eye along the way. Trying to reconstruct the story, you recall so many different faces there are said to be 100 speaking roles in the movie and locations that you realize a world has been created.
More than one world, actually. The world of Henri Fortin, the world of Roger Fortin, the world of the Zimans, and the world inside the head of an ordinary man who, by treasuring the story of one of the great heroes of French literature, absorbs some of his greatness.

"Youve Been Trumped 2012" Directed by
Anthony Baxter Written by
Richard Phinney Baxter
Documentary Rated NR
95 minutes When purchased in 2007 by Trump, the land was a conservation area, with sand dunes 4,000 years old and a mixture of ocean-shore environments. "We\ve had tremendous support from the environmentalists," Trump says to a TV interviewer, which is a bald-faced lie. We see spokesmen for U.K. environmental organizations who are bitterly opposed, and indeed his building permit was turned down by the local council before being restored by the Scottish Parliament on the grounds that it would bring jobs to the sparsely populated area.
But that isn\t what\s most fascinating about Anthony Baxter\s one-man indie documentary. It\s Donald Trump\s almost joyous rudeness. The Donald loves playing a bad guy. One of his targets in the project are a few small farm homes that he fears would "spoil the view" of his luxury hotel guests. Having stayed at hotels in the area, I found the sight of farms added to my pleasure.
But listen to Trump describe Michael Forbes, a man who has refused to sell his strategically located land to the robber baron: "The man lives in a pig sty. He lives in garbage. He\s a pig." Say what? Has Trump ever visited the Forbes farm or been inside his home? Not bloody likely. What we see is a farm, with machinery, outbuildings, chickens, ponies and no pigs. I imagine Trump\s idea of beauty is the antiseptic tackiness of the tinfoil towers he erects around the world.
Trump\s operation moves with cruel efficiency. Tons of sand are bulldozed from a virgin beach and piled up to create a small mountain blocking Forbes\ view. His water and electricity are cut off, and when he visits the Trump site office, he is dismissed curtly. "Is that an expensive camera?" Trump\s man asks the director Baxter. The local police later arrest Baxter and hold him in jail for four hours, on general principles. From what we see, they were unprovoked.
We visit and meet Forbes, whose meticulously trimmed mustache alone should raise doubts about his piggish existence — all right, I\ll say it — especially in contrast to what David Letterman describes as "the thing that lives on Donald Trump\s head." We also visit Susan Munro, who shows old movies of her father, a fisherman who lived on the very same spot, and David Milne, another indignant local. Local outrage inspires a protest march on the area. There\s an uproar when a local university grants Trump an honorary degree; the school\s former principal returns his own degree in protest. Trump proudly marches in with two hired bagpipers who hilariously accompany him everywhere he goes.
"The underlying message is that if you are rich and powerful enough, you can run roughshod over tradition and private property rights and buy your place at the table. One 18-hole course of Trumps new development opened in July, but construction on the 450-room hotel has been halted. Trumps reason for the delay is priceless: He threatened to move the development elsewhere because the windmills of an offshore wind farm will spoil the view of his guests. He announced his decision at about the same time he commenced his bid for the U.S. presidential nomination."
"Do the math. To tee up at the Trump course will cost around $310, about the same as the worlds first and most famous golf course, the Old Course in nearby St. Andrews. How many rounds of golf do you need to sell to pay for a luxury hotel? Can he make a go of the project without the hotel? Construction remains on hold."
In medieval times, the nobility enjoyed something called
droit du seigneur
", their right to deflower their serfs virgin daughters before their marriage. These days the nobility has been replaced by billionaire bullies, who continue to screw us serfs."

The Day of the Jackal 1973 Action, Foreign, Suspense, Thriller
Rated PG 141 minutes
Fred Zinnemann
’s “The Day of the Jackal” is one hell of an exciting movie. I wasn’t prepared for how good it really is: it’s not just a suspense classic, but a beautifully executed example of filmmaking. It’s put together like a fine watch. The screenplay meticulously assembles an incredible array of material, and then Zinnemann choreographs it so that the story--complicated as it is--unfolds in almost documentary starkness.
The “jackal” of the title is the code name for a man who may or may not be a British citizen specializing in professional assassinations. He allegedly killed Trujillo of the Dominican Republic in 1961 and, now, two years later, he has been hired by a group of Frenchmen who want de Gaulle assassinated. His price is $500,000; he says, “and considering that I’m handing you France, I wouldn’t call that expensive.” Zinnemann, working from
Frederick Forsyth
’s bestseller, tells both sides of the story that unfolds during the summer of 1963. The jackal prepares two disguises and three identities, gets a legal passport by applying in the name of a child who died in 1931, and calls on European experts for his materials.
An old gunsmith hand-makes a weird-looking lightweight rifle with silencer, sniper scope, and explosive bullets. A forger provides French identity papers and a driver’s license and comes to an unexpected end. And then the jackal enters France.
Meanwhile, the government has received information that an attempt will be made on de Gaulle’s life. The general absolutely insists that he will make no changes in his public schedule, and that any attempt to prevent an assassination must be made in secret. The French police cooperate “unofficially” with the top police forces of other nations in attempting an apprehension. But they don’t even know who the jackal is.
How can they stop him? The movie provides a fascinating record of police investigative work, which combines exhaustive checking with intuition. But the jackal is clever, too, particularly when he’s cornered. Some of the movie’s finest moments come after the jackal’s false identity is discovered and his license plates and description are distributed. He keeps running--and always convincingly; this isn’t a movie about a killer with luck, but about one of uncommon intelligence and nerve.
Playing the jackal,
Edward Fox
is excellent. The movie doesn’t provide much chance for a deep characterization, but he projects a most convincing persona. He’s boyishly charming, impeccably groomed, possessed of an easy laugh, and casually ruthless. He will kill if there’s the slightest need to. Fox’s performance is crucial to the film, of course, and the way he carries it off is impressive.
The others on the case are uniformly excellent, especially
Tony Britton
as a harried police inspector and
Cyril Cusack
, in a nicely crafted little vignette, as the gunsmith. The movie’s technical values as is always the case with a Zinnemann film are impeccable. The movie was filmed at great cost all over Europe, mostly on location, and it looks it. A production of this scope needs to appear absolutely convincing, and Zinnemann has mastered every detail including the casting of a perfect de Gaulle look-alike.
“The Day of the Jackal” is two and a half hours long and seems over in about fifteen minutes. There are some words you hesitate to use in a review, because they sound so much like advertising copy, but in this case I can truthfully say that the movie is spellbinding.

Mi Vida Loca 1994 Cast
Angel Aviles as Sad Girl
Seidy Lopez as Mousie
Jacob Vargas as Ernesto
Written and Directed by Allison Anders
Drama Rated R
For Strong Language, and For Drug Content and Some Sexuality 92 minutes
"Mi Vida Loca," which translates as "My Crazy Life," takes place in the Echo Park neighborhood of Los Angeles, and is about street gangs. An image immediately springs into the mind, but it would be the wrong image, because these gang members are younger than you might imagine. And they are women.
The writer and director,
Allison Anders
", moved into the neighborhood and researched the film by getting to know many of the young Latina women who were her neighbors. She found that their personal, social and emotional lives were tied up in gangs; if, in previous generations, gangs were all-male and the women were sort of a ladies auxiliary, now the women have gangs of their own."
"And drifting just under the films surface is the unspoken fact that these gangs are filling a vacuum, because so many of the young men in the community are already in jail, or dead, because of their own gang involvement."
The movie tells the sometimes interlocking stories of several of the women, who narrate on the sound track. The central story involves two friends who have children by the same father, who is killed in a drug deal. They feel they must become enemies, but at last they decide to honor their friendship, and they see their babies as a form of immortality for the dead father.
We watch as the women hold gang meetings, raise their children, hang out, gossip, and although this is played down get involved in drug deals, as sellers or buyers. We see how a misunderstanding involving a customized car leads to a drive-by shooting. We watch some of the skills they have developed, including using pay phones to make drug deals harder for the police to track.
The characters are known by their gang names. Sad Girl 
Angel Aviles
 explains that she got hers because the name was available when she joined the gang, and we realize these names are handed down from one generation to the next, as a form of honor. Not much is made of the implication that the turnover in names can also be read as a death rate.
In researching the story, Anders got close to these women and although she uses professional actors as most of the leads, some gang members play themselves. She tends, I think, to romanticize them: To see their world through their eyes, so that the events of a few square blocks represent the whole world, and one of the consolations of dying young is supposed to be that your home girls will never forget you.
The storytelling is not very well organized; the movie is more anecdotal than involving. But what we do get is a vivid impression of these young women and their world, and an understanding of how the gang performs a social function that otherwise would be missing. Perhaps in not forming into a story, the movie does a service, by not forcing a conclusion where none should exist. The gangs have no beginning or end. They exist, and continue, as new faces appear and old ones disappear for good reasons and bad.

Idi Amin Dada 1976 Directed by
Barbet Schroeder Produced by
Jean-Pierre Rassam Charles-Henri Favrod
Photographed by Nestor Almendros
Edited by Denise de Casabianca
Documentary, Foreign, War 90 minutes
"We know that thousands of Ugandans have been executed under his reign. We know that the nations entire Asian community was stripped of its possessions and deported. We remember Entebbe. And yet here he is playing a concertina at a hotel dance, and lecturing the nations doctors against drunkenness, and theres a sort of charismatic charm. The film was directed by a French citizen,"
Barbet Schroeder
whose credits as a producer include all six of Eric Rohmer\s "moral tales" which consider human personalities radically removed from Amin\s. Schroeder and his crew, including the great European cameraman Nestor Alamendros, went to Uganda in 1974 with a simple offer: Would Amin like to "direct" himself in a documentary? He would, and he does, and the result is revealing and chilling.
He appears in many scenes that were, Schroeder tells us on the sound track, staged for the movie. We see Amin surrounded by smiling and applauding villagers and lots of kids -- all of them rounded up for the occasion. We see him addressing the nations\ military, its doctors, even its crocodiles. He strides out into a field, dressed in battle camouflage, and takes command in a mock raid on Israel\s Golan Heights. As he explains how he will defeat the Israelis, we notice that his forces consist of a few hundred men and two jet airplanes. The footage in the film was approved by Amin, we\re told; does he realize what light it depicts him in? He holds a cabinet meeting for the benefit of the cameras. As his generals and ministers sit stiffly, taking notes, he lectures them on the need to make Ugandans love their leaders. This eventually becomes an exhortation on the duties of cabinet ministers to love their leader, and finally Amin ends with an ultimatum: "Anyone absent from three cabinet meetings without an excuse will be banished from the cabinet!" It\s like
Alice in Wonderland
-- or Africa.
The filmmakers question Amin on some of his more notorious opinions, such as that the Germans should have murdered more Jews, and he replies evasively, "We should talk of the future -- not the past." He says on record that airplane hijackers would be welcome in Uganda, as indeed they were. But what about the innocent passengers on the hijacked planes? His answer: "They are not too innocent, you see, because they are flying El Al or TWA. They should fly our own East African Airlines, an excellent airline -- or Air France." He laughs. The others laugh too. Entebbe was two years in the future.
There are shots of the Ugandan capitol, a modern city with skyscrapers, but then we see that the shops are without goods. The expulsion of the Indian community virtually brought Uganda\s retail trade to a halt. And yet the country is prosperous; it has enough food to feed its 10 million people, and it has valuable exports such as coffee. Money is spent on an Air Force, and Amin exhorts his pilots: "When you fly, do not think of returning to the base -- think of your mission, which is more important than returning to the base." Silence for a moment as the pilots no doubt reflect that enough missions like that would wipe out the Air Force, and then Amin breaks into a laugh and so the others can laugh, too. Later he will boast of his Navy, although Uganda is landlocked. He forgets to laugh. The others do not.
I suggested that "Idi Amin Dada" isn\t a very good documentary. That\s no doubt partly because Amin limited the filmmakers to what he wanted them to see. They didn\t have the time or the freedom to photograph all they wanted, or how they wanted. But the subject matter is so compelling, and Amin reveals himself so freely, that the movie\s compelling all the same. We\re left with contradictory, disturbing images. That scene at the hotel-dance, for example, where Amin plays the concertina and is backed up by a little rhythm band. The evenings guests fill the dance floor and Amin is the perfect host. He even composed the song he\s singing. It is in praise of himself.

Get Smart 2008 Cast
Steve Carell as Maxwell Smart
Anne Hathaway as Agent 99
Alan Arkin as The Chief
Dwayne Johnson as Agent 23
Terence Stamp as Siegfried
James Caan as President
Patrick Warburton as Hymie
Directed by Peter Segal
Written by Tom J. Astle
Matt Ember Based on characters by
Mel Brooks Action, Adventure, Comedy
Rated PG-13 rude humor, action violence and language
110 minutes The closing credits of “Get Smart” mention
Mel Brooks
and
Buck Henry
, creators of the original TV series, as “consultants.” Their advice must have been: “If it works, don’t fix it.” There have been countless comic spoofs of the genre founded by James Bond, but “Get Smart” both on TV and now in a movie is one of the best. It’s funny, exciting, preposterous, great to look at, and made with the same level of technical expertise we’d expect from a new Bond movie itself. And all of that is very nice, but nicer still is the perfect pitch of the casting.
Steve Carell
makes an infectious Maxwell Smart, the bumbling but ambitious and unreasonably self-confident agent for CONTROL, a secret U.S. agency in rivalry with the CIA. His job is to decipher overheard conversations involving agents of KAOS, its Russian counterpart. At this he is excellent: What does it mean that KAOS agents discuss muffins? That they have a high level of anxiety, of course, because muffins are a comfort food. Brilliant, but he misses the significance of the bakery they’re also discussing — a cookery for high-level uranium.
Smart is amazingly promoted to a field agent by the Chief 
Alan Arkin
, calm and cool and teamed with the beautiful Agent 99 
Anne Hathaway
, who never tries too hard but dominates the screen effortlessly. They go to Russia, joining with Agent 23 
Dwayne Johnson
, once known as
The Rock
. Their archenemy is waiting for them; he’s Siegfried 
Terence Stamp
, a cool, clipped villain.
And that’s about it, except for a series of special-effects sequences and stunt work that would truly give envy to a James Bond producer. “Get Smart” is an A-level production, not a cheapo ripoff, and some of the chase sequences are among the most elaborate you can imagine — particularly a climactic number involving planes, trains and automobiles. Maxwell Smart of course proves indestructible, often because of the intervention of Agent 99; he spends much of the center portion of the film in free-fall without a parachute, and then later is towed behind an airplane.
The plot involves a KAOS scheme to nuke the
Walt Disney
concert hall in Los Angeles during a concert being attended by the U.S. president. The nuclear device in question is concealed beneath the concert grand on the stage, which raises the question: Since you’re using the Bomb, does its location make much difference, give or take a few miles?
It raises another question, too, and here I will be the gloom-monger at the festivities. Remember right after 9/11, when we wondered if Hollywood would ever again be able to depict terrorist attacks as entertainment? How long ago that must have been, since now we are blowing up presidents and cities as a plot device for Maxwell Smart. I’m not objecting, just observing. Maybe humor has a way of helping us face our demons.
The props in the movie are neat, especially a Swiss Army-style knife that Maxwell never quite masters. The locations, many in Montreal, are awesome; I learned with amazement that Moscow was not one of them, but must have been created on a computer. The action-and-chase sequences do not grow tedious because they are punctuated with humor. I am not given to quoting filmmakers in praise of their own work in press releases, but director
Peter Segal
does an excellent job of describing his method: “If we plan a fight sequence as a rhythmic series of punches, we would have a ‘bump, bump, bam’ or a ‘bump, bump, smack.’ We can slot in a punchline instead of a physical hit. The rhythm accentuates the joke and it becomes ‘bump, bump, joke’ with the verbal jab as the knockout or a joke immediately followed by the last physical beat that essentially ends the conversation.”
Yes. And the jokes actually have something to do with a developing story line involving Anne Hathaway’s love life, the reason for her plastic surgery, and a love triangle that is right there staring us in the face. One of the gifts of Steve Carell is to deliver punchlines in the middle of punches and allow both to seem real enough at least within the context of the movie. James Bond could do that, too. And in a summer with no new Bond picture, will I be considered a heretic by saying “Get Smart” will do just about as well?

Miracle 2004 Cast
Kurt Russell as Herb Brooks
Eddie Cahill as Jim Craig
Michael Mantenuto "as Jack OCallahan"
"Patrick OBrien Dempsey" as Mike Eruzione
Kenneth Mitchell as Ralph Cox
Nathan West as Rob McClanahan
Noah Emmerich as Craig Patrick
Patricia Clarkson as Mrs. Brooks
Directed by "Gavin OConnor"
Written by Eric Guggenheim
Drama, History, Sports Film Rated PG
for language and some rough sports action 135 minutes
"Miracle" is a sports movie that\s more about the coach than about the team, and that\s a miracle, too. At a time when movies are shamelessly aimed at the young male demographic, here\s a film with a whole team of hockey players in their teens and early 20s, and the screenplay hardly bothers to tell one from another. Instead, the focus is on Herb Brooks 
Kurt Russell
", a veteran hockey coach from Minnesota who is assigned the thankless task of assembling a team to represent America in the 1980 Winter Olympics. The United States hasnt won since 1960, and the professionals on the Soviet team -- not to mention the Swedes, the Finns and the Canadians -- rule the sport."
"This is a Kurt Russell you might not recognize. Hes beefed up into a jowly, steady middle-age man who still wears his square high-school haircut."
Patricia Clarkson
", who plays Brooks wife, has the thankless role of playing yet another movie spouse whose only function in life is to complain that his job is taking too much time away from his family. This role, complete with the obligatory shots of the wife appearing in his study door as the husband burns the midnight oil, is so standard, so ritualistic, so boring, that I propose all future movies about workaholics just make them bachelors, to spare us the dead air. At the very least, she could occasionally ask her husband if he thinks he looks good in those plaid sport coats and slacks."
"Herb Brooks is a real man he died in a car accident just after the film was finished, and the movie presents him in all his complexity. Its fascinated by the quirks of his personality and style; we can see hes a good coach, but, like his players, were not always sure if we like him. Thats whats good about the film: The way it frankly focuses on what a coach does, and how, and why. Brooks knows hockey, and disappointment: He was cut from the 1960 American hockey team only a week before the first game, and so in this film, when he has to cut one more player at the last moment, we know how he feels -- and he knows how the player feels."
"Brooks strategy is to weave an air of mystery about himself. He assigns his assistant coach, Craig Patrick "
Noah Emmerich
, to become a friend to the players -- because Brooks deliberately does not become a friend, stays aloof, wants to be a little feared and a little resented. At one point, after chewing out his team in the locker room, he stalks out and, passing Patrick, says in a quiet aside, "That oughta wake \em up."
"After Brooks is selected for the job, his first task is to select his team. He immediately breaks with tradition. Amateur sports are overrun with adults who are essentially groupies, loving to get close to a team, treasuring their blazers with the badges on the breast pockets. These guys think they will join Brooks in choosing the American finalists after a week of tryouts, but Brooks announces his final cut on the first day of practice; he already knows who he wants, and doesnt require any advice. Hes looking for kids who are hungry and passionate and"
need
to win.
Most of the time, the team is seen as a unit. We begin to recognize their faces, but not much is done to develop them as individuals. The exception is the goaltender, Jim Craig 
Eddie Cahill
. He refuses to take a psychological exam that Brooks hands out, and Brooks tells him that, by not taking it, "you just took it." Later, when Craig seems to falter, Brooks benches him, and says, "I\m looking for the guy who refused to take the test."
We know all the cliches of the modern sports movie, but "Miracle" sidesteps a lot of them. Eric Guggenheim\s screenplay, directed by
"Gavin OConnor"
", is not about how some of the players have little quirks that they cure, or about their girl, or about villains that have to be overcome. Its about practicing hard and winning games. It doesnt even bother to demonize the opponents. When the team finally faces the Soviets, theyre depicted as -- well, simply as the other team. Their coach has a dark, forbidding manner and doesnt smile much, but hes not a Machiavellian schemer, and the Soviets dont play any dirtier than most teams do in hockey."
Oddly enough, the recent movie this one reminds me of is Robert Altman\s "
The Company
," about the Joffrey Ballet. Altman was fascinated by the leadership style of the company\s artistic director, and how he deliberately uses strategy and underlings to create an aura of mysterious authority. And he dealt dispassionately with injuries, which are a fact of life and can end a career in a second. "Miracle" has a similar orientation.
In keeping with its analytical style, the movie doesn\t use a lot of trick photography in the hockey games. Unlike the fancy shots in a movie like "
The Mighty Ducks
," this one films the hockey matches more or less the way they might look in a good documentary, or a superior TV broadcast. We\re in the middle of the confusion on the ice, feeling the energy rather than focusing on plot points.
That leaves Kurt Russell and his character Herb Brooks as the center and reason for the film. Although playing a hockey coach might seem like a slap shot for an actor, Russell does real acting here. He has thought about Brooks and internalized him; the real Brooks was available as a consultant to the film. And Russell and
"OConnor"
"create a study of a personality, of a man who is leading young men through a process that led him to disappointment 20 years earlier. He has ideas about hockey and ideas about coaching, and like the Zen master Phil Jackson begins with philosophy, not strategy. The film doesnt even end with the outcome of the Big Game. It ends by focusing on the coach, after it is all over."

Hard Rain 1998 Cast
Morgan Freeman as Jim
Christian Slater as Tom
Randy Quaid as Sheriff
Minnie Driver as Karen
Ed Asner as Charlie
Michael Goorjian as Kenny
Dann Florek as Mr. Mehlor
Ricky Harris as Ray
Directed by Mikael Salomon
Written by Graham Yost
Action, Crime, Thriller Rated R
For Violence 98 minutes
"Hard Rain" is one of those movies that never convince you its stories are really happening. From beginning to end, I was acutely aware of actors being paid to stand in cold water. Suspension of my disbelief in this case would have required psychotropic medications.
"Oh, the film is well-made from a technical viewpoint. The opening shot is a hum-dinger, starting out with a vast floodplain, zooming above houses surrounded by water, and then ending with a closeup of a cops narrowing eyes. But even then, I was trying to spot the effects--to catch how they created the flood effect, and how they got from the flood to the eyes."
Funny, how some movies will seduce you into their stories while others remain at arm\s length. "
Titanic
" was just as artificial and effects-driven as "Hard Rain," and yet I was spellbound. Maybe it was because the people on the doomed ship had no choice: The Titanic was sinking, and that was that.
In "Hard Rain," there is a bad guy 
Morgan Freeman
" who has a choice. He wants to steal some money, but all during the film I kept wondering why he didnt just give up and head for dry ground. How much of this ordeal was he foolish enough to put up with? Water, cold, rain, electrocutions, murders, shotguns, jet-ski attacks, drownings, betrayals, collisions, leaky boats, stupid and incompetent partners, and your fingertips shrivel up: Is it worth it? The film opens in a town being evacuated because of rising flood waters. Theres a sequence involving a bank. At first we think were witnessing a robbery, and then we realize we are witnessing a pickup by an armored car. Whats the point? Since the bankers dont think theyre being robbed and the armored truck drivers dont think theyre robbing them, the sequence means only that the director has gone to great difficulty to fool us. Why? So we can slap our palms against our brows and admit we were big stupes? By the time we finally arrived at the story, I was essentially watching a documentary about wet actors at work."
Christian Slater
stars as one of the armored truck crew.
Randy Quaid
"is the ambiguous sheriff. Morgan Freeman is the leader of the would-be thieves, who have commandeered a power boat. Ah, but I hear you asking, why was it so important for the armored car to move the cash out of the bank before the flood? So Freemans gang could steal it, of course. Otherwise, if it got wet, hey, whats the Federal Reserve for?"
Minnie Driver
plays a local woman who teams up with Slater, so that they can fall in love while saving each other from drowning. First Slater is in a jail cell that\s about to flood, and then Driver is handcuffed to a staircase that\s about to flood, and both times I was thinking what rotten luck it was that "Hard Rain" came so soon after the scene in "Titanic" where
Kate Winslet
saved
Leonardo DiCaprio
"from drowning after he was handcuffed on the sinking ship. Its bad news when a big action scene plays like a demonstration of recent generic techniques."
"Meanwhile, Freemans character is too darned nice. He keeps trying to avoid violence while still trying to steal the money. This plot requires a mad dog like"
Dennis Hopper
". Freemans character specializes in popping up suddenly from the edge of the screen and scaring the other characters, even though it is probably pretty hard to sneak up on somebody in a powerboat. Freeman is good at looking wise and insightful, but the wiser and more insightful he looks, the more I wanted him to check into a motel and order himself some hot chocolate."
"Hard Rain" must have been awesomely difficult to make. Water is hard to film around, and here were whole city streets awash, at night and in the rain. The director is
Mikael Salomon
", a former cameraman, who along with cinematographer Peter Menzies Jr., does a good job of making everything look convincingly wet. And they stage a jet-ski chase through school corridors thats an impressive action sequence, unlikely though it may be."
I was in Los Angeles the weekend "Hard Rain" had its preview, and went to talk to the cast. I found myself asking: Wasn\t there a danger of electrocution when you were standing for weeks in all that water with electrical cables everywhere? That\s not the sort of question you even think about if the story is working. Hey, how about this for a story idea? An actor signs up for a movie about a flood, little realizing that a celebrity stalker, who hates him, has been hired as an electrician on the same picture.

Outsourced 2007 Cast
Josh Hamilton as Todd Anderson
Ayesha Dharker as Asha
Asif Basra as Purohit N. Virajnarianan
Matt Smith as Dave
Larry Pine as Veteran tourist
Written by George Wing
Jeffcoat Comedy, Drama, Indie, Romance
Rated PG-13 for some sexual content
102 minutes Note:
This movie, released in 2006, is receiving its Chicago premiere in a weeklong run beginning today at the Gene Siskel Film Center. Director John Jeffcoat will be present for an audience discussion at the 5:15 p.m. screening Sunday.
There is nothing in India more mysterious than the lovely land itself. The riot of colors, the careless jumble of the cities, the frequent friendliness and good humor of a people who are so different from us except that, often, they speak the same language. More or less.
"Outsourced" begins with an American sent to India to train the low-paid employees of a new call center for his company, American Novelty Products. It sells, he explains, "kitsch to redneck schmucks." His Indian assistant asks him, "Excuse me. What is \redneck\? What is \kitsch\? What is \schmuck\?"
And what are these products? American eagle sculptures. Wisconsin cheesehead hats. Branding irons for your hamburgers. The American is named Todd 
Josh Hamilton
, although everyone hears it wrong and calls him "Mr. Toad." His assistant has a much more sensible name, Purohit N. Virajnarianan 
Asif Basra
. Although wages are low in India, Purohit will make 500,000 rupees as the new manager. That comes out to about $11,000, enough for him to realize a long-delayed marriage to his betrothed.
Todd is a stranger in a very strange land. Some of his experience reminded me of my own at the Calcutta and Hyderabad film festivals. He wildly overtips a beggar woman at the airport. He finds himself riding in one of those three-wheeled open-air taxis. He makes the mistake of eating street food. He encounters new definitions of the acceptable on a crowded bus, a young boy politely stands up to offer Todd his seat, then sits back down on his lap. He is constantly bombarded by offers to go here, go there, buy this, see that. Sometimes these offers are worth listening to, as when they lead him to a charming rooming house.
And what about the call center itself? It looks like a concrete-block storage hut, still under construction. Inside, Purohit oversees 12 or 15 employees struggling with customer complaints. Question: "I\m ordering my American eagle from India?" Answer: "It is not made here, sir. It is made in China."
Average length of a call, over 12 minutes, Todd\s instructions: Get it down to six. Impossible. He starts with pep talks and lessons in pronunciation: "Say you are in Chicago. Pronounce it
sha-CAW- ga."
They obediently repeat:
Shy-CALL-go
. But one employee seems ahead of the curve. This is the beautiful, helpful Asha 
Ayesha Dharker
, who you may have seen in the title role of "
The Terrorist
" and the quite different role of Queen Jamillia in "Star Wars: Episode II -- Attack of the Clones."
She questions Todd during his classes, tells him he needs to know more about India, has a smile that dismisses his doubts. She becomes his teacher on such mysteries as Kali, the goddess of destruction. "Sometimes it is good to destroy. Then things can start again." And of course they fall in love, although it is not to be, because she was promised in an arranged marriage at the age of 4. "Then why are we here?" he asks her on a business trip, as they debate a position they find in a book at the Kama Sutra Hotel. "This is like a trip to Goa," she says, referring to the idyllic southern province of India, formerly Portuguese. In her mind, before a lifelong arranged marriage, one trip to Goa is permitted.
"Outsourced" is not a great movie and maybe couldn\t be this charming if it was. It is a film bursting with affection for its characters and for India. It never pushes things too far, never stoops to cheap plotting, is about people learning to really see one another. It has a fundamental sweetness and innocence. Josh Hamilton, a veteran of more than 40 movies, finds a defining role here, as an immensely amiable man. To look upon Ayesha Dharker is to like her. And in a time when the word "chemistry" is lightly bandied about, what they generate is the real thing. As in all Indian movies, there is no sex, but because this is a U.S. production, there is some kissing, and wow, it beats anything in the
Kama Sutra.

Elling 2002 Cast
Per Christian Ellefsen as Elling
Sven Nordin as Kjell Bjarne
Marit Pia Jacobsen as Reidun Nordsletten
Jorgen Langhelle as Frank Asli
Directed by Petter Naess
Written by Ingvar Ambjornsen
Based on the book by Ingvar Ambjornsen
Comedy, Drama, Foreign Rated R
For Language and Some Sexual Content 89 minutes
"Here are two men, both around 40, with no desire to cope with the world: Elling, who lived all of his life as a mamas boy and had to be hauled by the police out of a cupboard, where he was crouched and trembling after his mothers death, and Kjell Bjarne, who has been institutionalized so long, it is the only world he knows--although he fantasizes endlessly about nubile women in other worlds. Elling is assigned as Kjells roommate in a care home, and two years later, they are moved into an apartment in Oslo and given a shot at independent living."
"Elling," the deadpan Norwegian comedy that tells their stories, was nominated for an Oscar this year in the best foreign film category. It\s the kind of story that in the wrong hands would be cloying and cornball, but director
Petter Naess
has the right hands. He gives the movie edge and darkness, is unsentimental about mental illness, makes his heroes into men instead of pets, and still manages to find a happy ending.
Elling Per
Christian Ellefsen
 is slight, fastidious, fussy and extremely reluctant to go outdoors. Kjell Bjarne 
Sven Nordin
 is burly, unkempt, goes for days without a bath and knows a certain amount about the world, mostly by hearsay. When their social worker Frank 
Jorgen Langhelle
" tells them they must leave the apartment to buy food and eat in restaurants, Elling is incredulous: Whats the use of putting the Norwegian welfare state to all the expense of renting them a nice flat if they are expected to leave it? The movie is narrated by Elling, who depends on Kjell Bjarne always referred to by both names and is threatened when Reidun, an upstairs neighbor, pregnant and drunk, gets Kjells attention. Yet Elling is a fiercely honest man who tells both Kjell and Reidun "
Marit Pia Jacobsen
 that the other is in love. Then he ventures out into the night to poetry readings, having written down some words about Reidun\s fall on the stairs and realized, as he puts it, "My God, Elling, all your life you have walked the earth not knowing you were a poet!" At a reading, he befriends an old man who turns out to be a famous poet and to own a wonderful car, a 1958 Buick Century hardtop.
"Kjell can fix the car, and soon the four of them are heading for the poets country cottage for a weekend at which matters of love and identity will be settled, not without difficulties, not least when Kjell discovers that Reidun is prepared to sleep with him but does not suspect he has been wearing the same underwear for more than a week."
In a subtle, half-visible way, "Elling" follows the movie formula of other movies about mentally impaired characters the picnic outing is an obligatory scene. But "Elling" has no lessons to teach, no insights into mental illness, no labels, no morals. It is refreshingly undogmatic about its characters, and indeed Elling and Kjell may not be mentally ill at all--simply unused to living in the real world. The humor comes from the contrast between Elling\s prim value system, obviously reflecting his mother\s, and Kjell\s shambling, disorganized, good-natured assault on life. If Felix and Oscar had been Norwegian, they might have looked something like this.

Smiling Fish and Goat on Fire 2000 Cast
Derick Martini as Chris Remi
Steven Martini as Tony Remi
Christa Miller as Kathy
Directed by Kevin Jordan
Written by Jordan
Derick Martini Steven Martini
Comedy, Romance Rated R
For Language, Some Sexual Content and Brief Scenes Of Drug Use 90 minutes
The two brothers who are the heroes of Kevin Jordan\s "Smiling Fish and Goat on Fire" are not Native Americans, but their grandmother was half Indian, and she nicknamed them--Tony is Smiling Fish because he floats in the current, grinning, waiting for the world to drift his way. Chris is Goat on Fire because he wants to get everything exactly right. Chris is an accountant and Tony is an actor, which is the Los Angeles word for unemployed.
In their 20s, they live in the cozy bungalow left them by their parents whose marriage had an L.A.-style entrance and exit; they met on the Universal Studios tour and died in a traffic accident. Tony and Chris both have girlfriends, but we sense that one relationship is dying and the other looks ominous since the girl cries a lot during sex. And then their lives take a turn for the better with the introduction of two women, a 6-year-old girl, a 90-year-old man, and a chicken named Bob.
Chris 
Derick Martini
 meets Anna Rosemarie Addeo, an Italian who works on movies as an animal wrangler. Bob is her chicken. Tony meets his postal carrier, Kathy 
Christa Miller
", who is from Wyoming and has moved to L.A. in hopes that her daughter Nicole Heather Jae Marie will find work as a child actress. Kathys heart is more or less stolen by Tony when he silences the squeaking wheel on her mail cart with olive oil."
"Our hearts, meanwhile, are warmed by the introduction of a character named Clive Bill Henderson, who is the 90-year-old uncle of Chris boss. The boss asks Chris to give Clive a ride to work, and Clive turns out to be a bottomless well of entertainment and wisdom for Chris and Tony, and for us."
He used to work as a sound boom man on African-American movies, Clive says. He met Rebecca, the love of his life, on a Paul Robeson picture. At work, he erects a tent over his cubicle, moves a friendly desk lamp under it, and listens to jazz. The character could steal the movie, but generously shares it with the stories of the brothers and their new loves and leftover problems with the old loves.
"Smiling Fish and Goat on Fire" is one of those hand-made movies that sneaks into festivals and wins friends. I saw it on the final weekend of the 1999 Toronto Film Festival, where Henderson who is nowhere near 90 got a standing ovation. Talking to the filmmakers, I learned that director Jordan and the Martini brothers, who co-wrote the screenplay, were longtime friends, that the movie cost $40,000 and that it was shot in the brothers\ actual house. There is an echo here of a past Sundance winner, "
The Brothers McMullen
," also shot in its director\s home. Many other movies costing $40,000 and less, and more have gone into to deserved oblivion, but "Smiling Fish and Goat on Fire" has a freshness and charm, a winning way with its not terrifically original material. The movie isn\t really about a plot, but about developments in the lives of characters we like. When a standard plot element develops a possible pregnancy, for example, the movie uses it not for a phony narrative crisis, but for understated human comedy. By not trying too hard, by not pushing for opportunities to manipulate, the movie sneaks up and makes friends.
The brothers Martini are effortlessly likable and convincing in the film, which we feel is close to their personalities if not to the facts of their lives. As for Henderson, I hope casting directors see him here and use him. He has been in a lot of movies he was the no-nonsense cook in "
City Slickers
", but this movie suggests new ways he could be used; it gives him notes we want to hear again. And the way he evokes the lost world of the African-American film industry is like a film within the film; the way he evokes his love for Rebecca, glimpsed only in old photos, is surprisingly moving.

Reconstruction 1970 Directed by
Christoffer Boe Ake Sandgren
Written by Boe
Mogens Rukov Drama, Foreign, Romance
100 minutes A young man named Alex sees a woman on a Copenhagen railroad platform and impulsively dumps his girlfriend in order to pursue his new fixation. Turns out the woman is married -- and to a well-known writer, at that. After a one-night affair, Alex suddenly finds that his old life has simply ... ceased to exist. What is going on here?

The Perfect Score 2004 Cast
Scarlett Johansson as Francesca
Erika Christensen as Anna
Chris Evans as Kyle
Darius Miles as Desmond
Leonardo Nam as Roy
Bryan Greenberg as Matty
Directed by Brian Robbins
Written by Mark Schwahn
Marc Hyman Jon Zack
Comedy, Crime, Family Rated PG-13
for language, sexual content and some drug references 93 minutes
The dialogue in "The Perfect Score" mentions "
The Breakfast Club
," which is nice. How come the characters in movies never seem to know there are movies -- except the ones they attend but never watch? And there are similarities between the two films, not least in the way that
Scarlett Johansson
, with her red lips and brunet haircut, resembles
Molly Ringwald
. There is also a certain seriousness linking the two films, although this one tilts toward a caper comedy.
The film takes place in Princeton, N.J., which in addition to being Albert Einstein\s place of last employment, is also home to the Princeton Testing Center, home of the SAT exam. The SATs, we learn, were once known as the Scholastic Aptitude Test, but since this name presumably reeked of common sense, it was dropped, and now "SAT" simply stands for -- SAT. "Ess Ay Tee," the Web site explains, making it easy for us.
We meet Kyle 
Chris Evans
, who for as long as he can remember has wanted to be an architect. That for him translates into being admitted to Cornell, but for Cornell, alas, he will need to score a 1430 on his SAT, and his first score is down close to triple digits. He can take the test again, but he doubts he can improve his score.
"Kyle," says one of his buddies, "this is your dream, man. If they want to put a number on that, then the hell with them." Yeah. So Kyle and his posse decide to break into the Princeton Testing Center, steal the answers to the test and realize their dream. And that they set out to do, in a film that sketches various motives for a half-dozen characters. You may be able to find parallels between these characters and those in "The Breakfast Club." On the other hand, you may decide life is too short.
I wasn\t thinking about "The Breakfast Club," anyway, while I watched the film. I was thinking about "
Better Luck Tomorrow
," the 2002 film by
Justin Lin
about a group of Asian-American high school students in Orange County, Calif., who started by selling exam answers and ended up involved in drugs and murder, all without getting caught. In the original ending of the film when it played at Sundance, the central character considers turning himself in to the police, but "I couldn\t let one mistake get in the way of everything I\d worked for. I know the difference between right and wrong, but I guess in the end I really wanted to go to a good college."
"Lin reshot some of the film, including that ending, but Ive always thought it was a good one. It shows an ability to separate achievement from morality, and places so much value on success that it finally justifies any action. Lins young heroes, I wrote in my article about the best films of the year, have positioned themselves to take over from the fallen leaders of Enron."
I thought about the film because "The Perfect Score" considers similar material without the bite and anger and savage determination. It\s too palatable. It maintains a tone of light seriousness, and it depends on the caper for too much of its entertainment value. "Better Luck Tomorrow" also has a plot that involves crime, but the difference is "The Perfect Score" is about the intended crime and depends on it, while in "Better Luck Tomorrow," we see a process by which the behavior of the characters leads them where they never thought to go.
"There is a kind of franchising of movies going on right now, in which the big studio product is like fast food: bad for you, but available on every corner. Good and challenging movies are limited to release in big cities and in a handful of independently booked cinemas. Whole states and sections of the country never see the best new films on big screens, and theyre not always easy to find on video."
"The Perfect Score" will play in hundreds of markets that were not open to "Better Luck Tomorrow," even though it will only bore or fitfully distract its audiences, while "Better Luck Tomorrow" might have shaken them up. And that\s a shame. What does it say when a dozen of the titles nominated for major Academy Awards this year did not play in a majority of the markets? Have I drifted from the movie under review? I\m not drifting, I\m swimming.

Thomas And The Magic Railroad 2000 Written and Directed by
Britt Allcroft Animation, Drama, Family, Science Fiction
Rated G 79 minutes
He is the character played by
Peter Fonda
, and he spends much of his time in a cave deep within Muffle Mountain with Lady, a tank engine he has been trying to repair for years, but without luck: "I\ve never been able to bring her to life,\\ he complains. "To make her steam.\\ Fonda is so depressed by this failure that he mopes through the entire role, stoop-shouldered, eyes downcast, step faltering, voice sad, as if he had taken the screenplay too literally "Burnett is depressed because he cannot get Lady to run\\ and did not realize that, hey, this is a kiddie movie.
Other actors are likewise adrift in the film. A few years ago,
Alec Baldwin
was delivering the electrifying monologue in \xa0"
Glengarry Glen Ross
."\xa0Now he is Mr. Conductor, about 12 inches tall, materializing in a cloud of sparkle dust in a geranium basket. I do not blame him for taking a role in a children\s movie, not even a role 12 inches high. I do question his judgment in getting into this one.
"Thomas and the Magic Railroad\\ is an inept assembly of ill-matched plot points, meandering through a production that has attractive art direction despite the immobile mouths. Many of the frames would make cheerful stills. Thomas and his fellow trains, even Evil Diesel, have kind of a jolly energy, and I like the landscapes and trees and hamlets.
But what a lugubrious plot. What endless trips back and forth between the Isle of Sodor and the full-sized town of Shining Time. What inexplicable characters, such as Billy Twofeathers 
Russell Means
, who appear and disappear senselessly. What a slow, wordy, earnest enterprise this is, when it should be quick and sprightly.
That "Thomas and the Magic Railroad\\ made it into theaters at all is something of a mystery. This is a production with "straight to video\\ written all over it. Kids who like the Thomas books might might kinda like it.
Especially younger kids. Real younger kids. Otherwise, no.
"Perhaps the success of the Harry Potter books has inspired hope that Thomas, also a British childrens icon, will do some business. Not a chance. In an age when even the cheapest Saturday morning cartoons find a way to make the lips move, what, oh, what, was the reasoning behind Thomas painted-on grin?"

Since Otar Left 2004 Cast
Temour Kalandadze as Tenguiz
Roussoudan Bolkvadze as Roussiko
Sacha Sarichvili as Alexi
Douta Skhirtladze as Niko
Directed by Julie Bertuccelli
Written by Bertuccelli
Berenard Renucci Roger Bohbot
Drama, Foreign, Indie Rated NR
103 minutes \Since Otar Left" tells a story of conventional melodrama, and makes it extraordinary because of the acting. The characters are so deeply known, so intensely observed, so immediately alive to us, that the story primarily becomes the occasion for us to meet them. Nothing at the plot level engaged me much, not even the ending, which is supposed to be so touching. But I was touched deeply, again and again, simply by watching these people live their lives.
"Three women live in a book-lined flat in Tbilisi, the capital of the onetime Soviet republic of Georgia. Eka is the grandmother, very old, very determined she is played by Esther Gorintin, who was 85 when she began her acting career five years ago. Marina Nino Khomassouridze is her daughter, around 50, a woman of quick peremptory dismissals and sudden rushes of feeling. Ada Dinara Droukarova, late 20s, is Marinas daughter, a student of literature, bored with her life."
We gather that Eka was French, moved to Georgia with her Soviet husband, was a committed communist. She still thinks Stalin was a great man. Marina says he was a murderer. Ada looks incredulous that they are still having this argument. The cramped quarters are made into an arena when Eka turns up her television, and both Marina and Ada crank up their CD players.
But look at the way these actresses move. Every step, every gesture, suggests long familiarity with these lives. A visit to the post office observes the body language of people long buried in their jobs. The way that Marina discards her fork as the three women have tea says everything about her impatience. The women use verbal and physical shorthand to illuminate what goes without saying. Eka is always certain of herself. Marina is never satisfied "I wish I loved you," she says to her patient man friend. Ada is fed up and trapped.
"The crowded flat is dominated by the person who isnt there -- Otar, Ekas son, who has moved to Paris to look for work. He telephones, but the lines fail. He sends money, but the postal service is uncertain. Things worked better in Stalins day, Eka is certain. When news comes that Otar has been killed in an accident, Marina decides they will not tell old Eka, to spare her. This leads to a deception, the details of which are familiar from similar films."
What is not familiar, what becomes increasingly fascinating, is the direct and relentless way Eka marches toward the truth. She determines to go to Paris to visit her son, takes along the other two, finds them missing from their hotel room, and mutters, "Those two are leading me on."
What is clear is that this old woman has a life and will of her own. There is a wonderful scene while she is still at home in Georgia. She leaves the house alone, looks up some information in the library, buys two cigarettes, and smokes them while riding on a Ferris wheel. With a lesser actor or character, this would be a day out for a lovable granny. With Esther Gorintin playing Eka, it is the day of a woman who thinks she has it coming to her.
What happens, and how, need not concern us. What I remember is the way
Julie Bertuccelli
, the director and co-writer, sees right into the beings of her characters. Consider two scenes in which the old woman gets a foot massage. In one, her granddaughter absently massages her foot while reading aloud from Proust. In the other, her daughter, usually so wounded and stern, giggles helplessly while tickling her feet, and old Eka laughs and squirms like a child. After seeing this movie, you watch another one with less gifted actors, and the characters seem to have met each other for the first time on the set, earlier that day.

The Addams Family 1991 Cast
Anjelica Huston as Morticia Addams
Raul Julia as Gomez
Christopher Lloyd as Fester
Directed by Barry Sonnenfeld
Comedy, Family Rated PG-13
110 minutes There are a lot of little smiles in "The Addams Family," and many chuckles and grins, but they don’t add up to much. The movie is like a series of the Charles Addams cartoons that inspired it, in which each individual line or image is self-contained. I was mildly entertained, but I was hoping for big laughs and with one exception I didn’t find them.
The movie, based on characters created by Addams in his immortal New Yorker cartoons, and on the early 1960s TV series, looks uncannily like the original Addams drawings; the art direction must have been a rip-and-paste job. The ghoulish family lives in a many-turreted gothic mansion, next to its own graveyard, on a blasted heath where nothing grows except for dead things. Inside the house, all the ordinary rules of human nature are reversed, as when the mother finds her daughter going after a little brother with a kitchen knife, and sternly takes it away from her in order to hand over an ax.
Mother, named Morticia, is played by
Anjelica Huston
, who in makeup is a dead ringer for the original character. Her husband, Gomez, is played by
Raul Julia
, and despite the weirdness of their characters I did somehow feel chemistry between them. They’re having fun. Many of the better moments involve the two Addams children, Wednesday 
Christina Ricci
 and Pugsley Jimmy Workman, who before they go off to school are handed their lunches in brown bags with something alive inside.
Wednesday and Pugsley are responsible for the one big laugh in the movie, at a school pageant that ends with half of the audience drenched in stage blood. At least I hope it’s stage blood. The plot otherwise involves a scheme by the calculating family attorney 
Dan Hedaya
, who convinces the son of a client to impersonate Gomez’ long-lost older brother, Fester. The brother 
Christopher Lloyd
, from the "
Back to the Future
" movies stares out in dismay at the world through large black eye sockets, and is a miserable wretch until he begins to feel he actually belongs in the Addams household.
There are the beginnings of a lot of inspirations in the film, but somehow they’re not pushed through to true comic invention.
Take Thing, for example, the intelligent, disembodied hand that is a family pet. When the family is evicted from its home and forced to take real jobs, Thing gets a job delivering Federal Express parcels - but the movie throws away the funny possibilities here by merely showing Thing in fast motion, racing on its rounds. Wasn’t there anything actually funny they could dream up, involving the problems that a disembodied hand would have on the job? I was not one of the great admirers of "
Beetlejuice
," the 1988 comedy by
Tim Burton
, but, seeing this movie, I realize how much more creatively Burton used his special effects. Both movies are about strange evil creatures inhabiting a tricky haunted house, and yet in "The Addams Family" the effects seem put in for their own sake, to be looked at, and are not really exploited in the story.
That leaves the individual moments. Yes, a lot of them are funny. In the months before this movie opened, there were a lot of brief trailers for it in the theaters. You’ve probably seen some of them - like the one where the kids ask if the Girl Scout cookies are made from real Girl Scouts. By themselves, these lines are funny, as were the cartoon captions that inspired some of them. But they don’t build. They get a laugh, and then the movie has to build up to the next one. This is the kind of film that isn’t as much fun to see as it is to hear about.

Winterhawk 1975 Cast
Michael Dante as Winterhawk
Dawn Wells as The woman
Rated PG 98 minutes
"Winterhawk" is a traditional Western, simply and well told, almost old-fashioned in the clarity of its narrative. An hour or so into it, there\s a scene where a group of mountain men are gathered around a campfire, drinking coffee and huddling beneath their blankets for warmth, and something about the look and sound of them reminded me of the classic Westerns of
John Ford
.
"This could, indeed, almost be a Western from 20 or 30 years ago, if it werent for its sympathetic and evenhanded treatment of Indians. The movie takes place very early in the 19th Century, when most of the West was known only to its Indian inhabitants and a few white trappers and traders and mountain men: Neither the farmers nor the cowmen had arrived to start their disagreements. Theres a good attempt to be halfway authentic in terms of the period although the movies women apparently have found a supply of eyeliner out there in the wilderness, and the characters arent burdened with all the heavy symbolism, of latter-day Westerns."
"The story involves a Blackfoot chief, Winterhawk, who takes furs to trade with the white man in exchange for medicine to fight a smallpox epidemic thats decimating his tribe. Hes double-crossed, his furs are stolen and, in revenge, he kidnaps a white woman and her young brother and disappears back into the mountains. Their trek leads them past all sorts of glorious scenery, accompanied by appropriately heroic music. The movies great to look at."
A pursuit party sets off to find Winterhawk and "rescue" the woman and boy who increasingly don\t seem to need rescuing, and the filmmaker,
Charles Pierce
"populates the party and the stops along with way with a gallery of great Western character actors. You may not know them all by name - but, believe me, youve seen them in the forts and stagecoaches and saloons and jails of countless Westerns:"
Denver Pyle
, Lief Erickson,
Woody Strode
, Elisha Cook Jr., L. Q. Jones, Arthur Hunnicutt . . . the only ones missing are
Strother Martin
and good old
Dub Taylor
.
Winterhawk is played by
Michael Dante
", who uses the strong-and-silent routine for all its worth: It may be a cliche of a performance, but it works, and its interesting for once to find a movie Indian who speaks in an Indian language that has to be translated for the other characters. He and the girl,"
Dawn Wells
", exchange many meaningful glances and mutual silences before the movies ending which is a happy one, the exception in these cases. Theres a love interest, but its underplayed and allowed to develop convincingly, so we dont mind too much."
The movie works directly and doesn\t attempt to sneak allegories and messages past us. That makes it all the more convincing after the lugubrious "
The Master Gunfighter
," which turns up dubious "historical facts," works them into a plot lifted from a samurai drama and has the gall to pass itself off as a meaningful statement. Sometimes the best stories are the ones most simply told.

Four Lovers 2012 Cast
Marina Fois as Rachel
Elodie Bouchez as Teri
Roschdy Zem as Franck
Nicolas Duvauchelle as Vincent
Alexia Stresi as Diane
Directed by Antony Cordier
Written by Cordier
Julie Peyr Rated NR
suitable for adults At one point in "Four Lovers," the four lovers go into the pantry of an old French country house, pour bags full of white flour on the cobblestone floor, strip and roll around in the flour while having sex. They begin languorously, in voluptuous caresses, but you can\t fool me. Cobblestones have a decided detumescent effect. If you ever find yourself in such a situation, insist on being the missionary.
"This is a movie about two married couples who decide to share each others mates. There is little fascinating about them before they decide this, and still less after, because when it comes right down to it, looking at a lot of sex is not nearly as much fun as having it. The rolling around in the flour sequence is so tedious, I had to fast-forward through part of it. I saw this film on a DVD screener. You know theres something wrong with a sex movie when the good parts are the dialogue."
In Paris, we meet Rachel 
Marina Fois
, a designer of jewelry, and husband Franck 
Roschdy Zem
, who gives expert shiatsu massages and is writing a book titled
Feng Shui for Couples
. The book will explain why the bed has to face south and the cash register north, unless I have them mixed up. Their jewelry line needs help with its website, and they call in Vincent 
Nicolas Duvauchelle
", a software expert. As Vincent leans above Rachel at her keyboard, they feel unexpectedly strong erotic currents. Havent we all sometimes felt that grateful for computer advice?"
"Not long after, the two couples, also including Vincents wife, Teri "
Elodie Bouchez
, meet for dinner. Teri was an Olympic gymnast for France and now sits on the floor because her back has been giving her some trouble. Franck offers her a back massage, which begins with his fingers pressing and counting off each vertebrae while he names them, and when they reach the femur, Teri is feeling a lot better all over. They kiss. Now both couples are in play, and they decide to begin trading partners.
"Why? Why is not a word you should bring with you to this movie. Pourquoi pas? Is it possible for two couples to swap mates without jealousy? I doubt it. The men are the problem. When a husband is assured by his wife that he satisfies her just as much as the other man, I submit to you theres not a husband on earth capable of believing that. Women are more trusting, because sex is not the dominant theme in their life from age 13 to decrepitude."
"All four people are attractive, although Vincent has too many tattoos for my taste. He has a word in large letters running from one shoulder blade to the other, in an unreadable typeface he must have found on the web. My advice: stick to Helvetica. The four lovers become best friends, while effortlessly raising three children. Can this idyll last forever? No. One afternoon while theyre making love, Franck gets Teri to help him shift her bed closer to the window for feng-shui reasons. They forget the time, and when Vincent returns home unexpectedly, he is annoyed, not to find them in bed together, but to find the bed has been moved. Thats going too far."
When Franck presses his wife to describe any of Vincent\s problems, the best she can do is report that sometimes he has "trouble." What say? Trouble getting an erection? No, getting over it, if you see what I mean. I can understand why this might be a problem for Rachel, but Rachel, honey, it\s not what Franck wants to hear.
"The best parts of the film, for me, came toward the end, when the lives of the four lovers become bittersweet and melancholy. They were so happy for a time. They were inseparable. Now it is all over. Theres a flashback where they walk together down to the farm pond to wash off the flour. As they dry contentedly in the sun, Teri still has a little flour behind her ear. You cant do better than that."

Lost Highway 1997 Cast
Bill Pullman as Fred Madison
Patricia Arquette as Renee/Alice
Balthazar Getty as Pete Dayton
Robert Blake as Mystery Man
Gary Busey as Bill Dayton
Robert Loggia as Mr. Eddy/Dick Laurent
Directed by David Lynch
Written by Lynch
Barry Gifford Drama, Mystery, Romance, Thriller
Rated R Nudity, Violence
135 minutes David Lynch\s "Lost Highway\\ is like kissing a mirror: You like what you see, but it\s not much fun, and kind of cold. It\s a shaggy ghost story, an exercise in style, a film made with a certain breezy contempt for audiences. I\ve seen it twice, hoping to make sense of it. There is no sense to be made of it. To try is to miss the point. What you see is all you get.
"Thats not to say its without interest. Some of the images are effective, the soundtrack is strong and disturbing, and there is a moment that"
Alfred Hitchcock
would have been proud of although Hitchcock would not have preceded or followed it with this film. Hope is constantly fanned back to life throughout the story; we keep thinking maybe Lynch will somehow pull it off, until the shapeless final scenes, when we realize it really is all an empty stylistic facade. This movie is about design, not cinema.
It opens with two nervous people living in a cold, threatening house. They hate or fear each other, we sense. "You don\t mind if I don\t go to the club tonight?\\ says the wife 
Patricia Arquette
. She wants to stay home and read. "Read? Read?\\ he chuckles bitterly. We cut to a scene that feels inspired by a 1940s \noir\ "
Detour
" maybe, showing the husband 
Bill Pullman
 as a crazy hep-cat sax player. Cut back home. Next morning. An envelope is found on their steps. Inside, a videotape of their house which, architecturally, resembles an old IBM punch card.
"More tapes arrive, including one showing the wifes murdered body in bed. They go to a party and meet a disturbing little man with a white clown face "
Robert Blake
, who ingratiatingly tells Pullman, "We met at your house. As a matter of fact, I\m there right now. Call me.\\ He does seem to be at both ends of the line. That mirrors another nice touch in the film, which is that Pullman seems able to talk to himself over a doorbell speaker phone.
"Can people be in two places at once? Why not? Warning: plot point coming up. Halfway through the film, Pullman is arrested for the murder of his wife and locked in solitary confinement. One morning his guard looks in the cell door, and--good God! Its not the same man inside! Now its a teenager "
Balthazar Getty
". The prison officials cant explain how bodies could be switched in a locked cell, but have no reason to hold the kid. Hes released, and gets his old job at the garage."
A gangster 
Robert Loggia
 comes in with his mistress, who is played by Patricia Arquette. Is this the same person as the murdered wife? Was the wife really murdered? Hello? The story now focuses on the relationship between Getty and Loggia, a ruthless but ingratiating man who, in a scene of chilling comic violence, pursues a tailgater and beats him senseless "Tailgating is one thing I can\t tolerate\\. Arquette comes to the garage to pick up the kid "Why don\t you take me to dinner?\\ and tells him a story of sexual brutality involving Loggia, who is connected to a man who makes porno films. This requires a scene where Arquette is forced to disrobe at gunpoint and stand naked in a roomful of strange men--an echo of Isabella Rossellini\s humiliation in Lynch\s "
Blue Velvet
".
Does this scene have a point? Does any scene in the movie have a point? "Lost Highway\\ plays like a director\s idea book, in which isolated scenes and notions are jotted down for possible future use. Instead of massaging them into a finished screenplay, Lynch and collaborator
Barry Gifford
seem to have filmed the notes.
"Is the joke on us? Is it our error to try to make sense of the film, to try to figure out why protagonists change in midstream? Lets say it is. Lets say the movie should be taken exactly as is, with no questions asked. Then what do we have? We still have just the notes for isolated scenes. Theres no emotional or artistic thread running through the material to make it seem necessary that its all in the same film together. The giveaway is that the characters have no interest apart from their situation; they exist entirely as creatures of the movies design and conceits except for Loggias gangster, who has a reality, however fragmentary."
Luis Bunuel
, the Spanish surrealist, once made a film in which two actresses played the same role interchangeably, in the appropriately titled "
That Obscure Object of Desire
" 1977. He made absolutely no attempt to explain this oddity. One woman would leave a room and the other would re-enter. And so on.
"But when Lynch has Patricia Arquette apparently playing two women and Bill Pullman and Balthazar Getty perhaps playing the same man, we dont feel its a surrealistic joke. We feel--I dunno, I guess I felt jerked around. Lynch is such a talented director. Why does he pull the rug out from under his own films? I have nothing against movies of mystery, deception and puzzlement. Its just that Id like to think the director has an idea, a purpose, an overview, beyond the arbitrary manipulation of plot elements. He knows how to put effective images on the screen, and how to use a soundtrack to create mood, but at the end of the film, our hand closes on empty air."

I Am Number Four 2011 Cast
Alex Pettyfer as John
Timothy Olyphant as Henri
Dianna Agron as Sarah
Callan McAuliffe as Sam
Directed by D.J. Caruso
Written by Alfred Gough
Miles Millar Action, Adventure, Drama, Science Fiction, Thriller
Rated PG-13 for intense sequences of violence and action, and for language
109 minutes "I Am Number Four" is shameless and unnecessary. That\s sad, when a movie casts aside all shame, demonstrates itself willing to rip off anything that might attract audiences, and nevertheless fails. What we have here is a witless attempt to merge the "Twilight" formula with the
Michael Bay
formula. It ends with sexy human teenagers involved in an endless special effects battle with sexy alien teenagers who look like humans, in a high school and on its football field.
"Lets pause for a moment to consider this apocalyptic battle. It is all special effects. None of it is physically possible. It might as well be a cartoon; its essentially CGI animation intercut with brief bursts of inane dialogue. Brief, because the global action market doesnt much care about dialogue, and besides, when people start talking about something you could run into the hazard of having actual characters in a plot. Minute after relentless minute, creatures both human and alien, who we care nothing about, wage war and occasionally disintegrate into clouds of tiny pixels for no particular reason."
I like science fiction. The opening shot of "I Am Number Four" holds promise, as John 
Alex Pettyfer
", the narrator, explains that he is a Mogadorian, no doubt from a planet named Mogador. Specifically, he is Mogadorian No. 4. Dont expect me to explain the Mogadorian numbering system. He is hiding out on planet Earth and doing everything possible to disguise himself as a box-office attraction like Edward Cullen. They have already killed Nos. 1, 2 and 3."
Consider. The "Twilight" movies were about a handsome and sexy teenager who exerted a powerful attraction upon a virginal young girl, and yet held himself aloof because he was a vampire. Here John is a handsome and sexy teenager who is technically unavailable because he is an alien, although it appears that Mogador may luckily have evolved teenager boys indistinguishable from humans to such as Sarah 
Dianna Agron
.
John has been on the lam around America to remain in hiding from those who would kill him, and is accompanied by his fellow Mogadorian, Henri 
Timothy Olyphant
", who poses as his father and cautions him that his real father didnt die only to see John marry an Earth girl. Whether John has the option of returning to Mogador and settling down with a nice Mogadoress to raise Mogadorlings, I am not certain."
"The high school elements in the plot revolve around Johns popularity in some areas hes an ace on a Jet-Ski and non-conformity in others his palms function like high-powered searchlights. He is also free of the ordinary constraints of gravity and can leap for dozens of yards and even fly. What this means is that the climactic battle scene can take place largely in the air, and Harry Potters Quidditch games join the honor roll of the plundered."
There is no doubt a degree of identification available for the primary audience of "I Am Number Four." Many teenage girls have perhaps imagined themselves in love with a handsome hunk with tousled blond hair, a three-day stubble, incredible athletic abilities and hands that glow in the dark. That he is "Not From Around Here" makes him all the more attractive.
"In the film, we see native Mogadorians, whose faces are deeply scarred with gill-like extrusions. I am not completely sure if this is how John really looks and he has somehow morphed into teenager form, or if he was forced to flee Mogador because he looked like an alien Edward Cullen. Im sure this is all spelled out in the movie. Sometimes I find it so very, very hard to care."
Now imagine "I Am Number Four" as a "novelization." There would be the setup, a little dialogue, and then pages and pages of violent action:
John leaped 100 yards into the air and struck him with a deadly ray! An enemy fighter disintegrated into an ashy grey cloud of pixels! Number 6, her hair flowing in slow motion, whirled around and kicked the Mogadorian Commander! "Look out!" John shouted! "Behind you!" cried Sarah.
This would quickly grow old. Why audiences enjoy watching protracted sequences of senseless action mystifies me, but they do. There is no strategic or spatial way in which the battle in "I Am Number Four" makes any sense. It is movement and conflict edited together in incomprehensible chaos.
"Where is Mogador? Why did nine of its citizens flee to Earth? How did they do so? How is it they breathe our air, eat our food and make such expert use of our grooming products? Why didnt the other Mogadorians say to hell with it and leave them on Earth? What is a Mogadorian life span? Given what we know about the time and distance involved in space travel, are these the same nine individuals who fled Mogador, or their descendants after many generations in an interstellar ark? Whats the story on those spotlights in their hands?"
In all modesty, I think my questions are more entertaining than this movie.

What Dreams May Come 1998 Cast
Robin Williams as Chris Nielsen
Cuba Gooding Jr. as Albert
Annabella Sciorra as Annie Nielsen
Max von Sydow as The Tracker
Rosalind Chow as Leona
Directed by Vincent Ward
Written by Ron Bass
Action, Adventure, Drama, Fantasy, Romance, Science Fiction Rated PG-13
For Thematic Elements Involving Death, Some Disturbing Images and Language 113 minutes
Vincent Ward
\s "What Dreams May Come" is so breathtaking, so beautiful, so bold in its imagination, that it\s a surprise at the end to find it doesn\t finally deliver. It takes us to the emotional brink but it doesn\t push us over. It ends on a curiously unconvincing note--a conventional resolution in a movie that for most of its length has been daring and visionary.
So, yes, I have my disappointments with it. But I would not want them to discourage you from seeing it, because this is a film that even in its imperfect form shows how movies can imagine the unknown, can lead our imaginations into wonderful places. And it contains heartbreakingly effective performances by
Robin Williams
and
Annabella Sciorra
". The movie is so good it shows us how it could have been better: It seems headed for a great leap, we can sense it coming, and then it settles. If Hollywood is determined to short-change us with an obligatory happy ending, then it shouldnt torment us with a movie that deserves better."
"I hesitate to reveal too many secrets, but the films set-up has been so thoroughly publicized that by now you probably already know certain key facts. Save the review until later if you dont."
The facts you know from the ads and the trailers are that Chris and Annie Williams and Sciorra have a Cute Meet when their boats collide on a Swiss lake. They marry. They have two children. They are happy. Then both of the children are killed in an accident. Annie has a breakdown, Chris nurses her through, art works as therapy, they are somehow patching their lives back together--and then Chris is killed.
The film follows him into the next world, and creates it with visuals that seem borrowed from his own memories and imagination. In one sequence that is among the most visually exciting I have ever seen, he occupies a landscape that is a painting, and as he plucks a flower it turns to oil paint in his hand. Other parts of this world seem cheerfully assembled from the storage rooms of images we keep in our minds: Renaissance art, the pre-Raphaelites, greeting cards, angel kitsch cherubs float past on plump clouds. Later, when Chris ventures into hell, the images are darker and more fearsome--Bosch crossed with Dali.
There is a guide in the next world named Albert Cuba Gooding Jr.. Is he all that he seems? Now we have ventured beyond the information in the ads, and I will be more circumspect. The story, inspired by a novel by
Richard Matheson
, is founded on the assumption that heaven exists in a state of flux, that its inhabitants assume identities that please themselves, or us; that having been bound within one identity during life, we are set free. Heaven, in one sense, means becoming who you want to be.
And hell? "Hell is for those who don\t know they\re dead," says Albert. Or they know they\re dead but don\t know what the deal is. Or they won\t go along with the deal. Many of those in hell are guilty of the greatest sin against God, which is despair: They believe they are beyond hope.
After the death of her children and husband, Annie has despaired, killed herself and gone to hell. Chris wants to find her: "I\m her soul mate." Albert says that\s not possible: "Nothing will make her recognize you." But he acts as a guide, and Chris ventures into hell, which, like heaven, has been realized with a visual intensity and originality that is astonishing. In this film, the road to hell is paved, not with good intentions, but with the faces of the damned, bitter and complaining the face and voice of Chris\s father are played by the German director
Werner Herzog
.
What happens then, what happens throughout the film, is like nothing you have seen before. Vincent Ward is a New Zealand director whose works have not always reached a large audience, but have always dared for big ideas and bold visuals to express them. He made "The Navigator" 1988, about medieval Englishmen who tunnel to escape the plague--and emerge in the present. And then, in 1993, he made the great "
Map of the Human Heart
," about the odyssey of an Eskimo boy from Alaska in the 1930s to London in the war, and from a great love affair to high adventure.
"What Dreams May Come" ends, like "The Navigator," with the characters seeking their destiny in a cathedral--but this one, like many of the film\s images, is like none you have seen before. It is upside-down, the great vaulted ceilings providing a floor and a landscape. Since I have mentioned Herzog, I might as well quote his belief that our century is "starving for great images." This film provides them, and also provides quiet moments of winsome human nature, as when a character played by
Rosalind Chao
explains why she appears to be an Asian flight attendant, and when another, played by Max Von Sydow, explains the rules of the game as he understands them.
Robin Williams somehow has a quality that makes him seem at home in imaginary universes. Remember him in "
Popeye
," "
The Adventures of Baron Munchausen
," "
Toys
," "
Jumanji
," and in his animated incarnation in "
Aladdin
." There is a muscular reality about him, despite his mercurial wit, that anchors him and makes the fantastic images around him seem almost plausible. He is good, too, at emotion: He brings us along with him. In Annabella Sciorra, he has a co-star whose own character is deeply unhappy and yet touching; her sin of despair was committed, we believe, because she loved so much and was so happy she cannot exist in the absence of those feelings.
And yet, as I\ve suggested, the movie somehow gathers all these threads and its triumphant art direction and special effects, and then doesn\t get across the finish line with them. I walked out of the theater sensing that I should have felt more, that an opportunity had been lost. "What Dreams May Come" takes us too far and risks too much to turn conventional at the end. It could have been better. It could perhaps have been the best film of the year. Whatever its shortcomings, it is a film to treasure.

Critters 1986 Cast
Dee Wallace Stone as Helen
M. Emmet Walsh as Harv
Billy Green Bush as Jay Brown
Scott Grimes as Brad Brown
Don Opper as Charlie McFadden
Terrence Mann as Johnny Steele
Directed by Stephen Herek
Produced by Rupert Harvey From
From A Screenplay by Herek
Screenplay by Domonic Muir
Photographed by Tim Suhrstedt
Music by David Newman
Comedy, Horror, Science Fiction Rated PG-13
85 minutes "If perfect fools can hold drivers licenses, why cant creatures from outer space be just as dumb? And if they are bounty hunters, why shouldnt they be trigger-happy, firing at everything that moves, like a television set, for example? We always assume that visitors from other worlds will be far more intelligent than we are, but maybe theyll just turn out to have faster means of intergalactic travel."
In the opening scenes of "Critters," a spaceship is approaching a barren asteroid that has been converted into a prison. It is carrying on board several of the dreaded Krites, who are furry little bowling balls with dozens of rows of sharp teeth. The Krites escape, take over the ship and land on Earth. And bounty hunters follow them here, while the nasty little critters are terrorizing the countryside.
What this gives us is a truly ambitious ripoff of not one but four recent science-fiction movies: "
Gremlins
," "
E.T. The Extra-Terrestrial
" 1982, "The Terminator" and "
Starman
." We get the critters from "Gremlins," and from "Starman" we get the notion that an alien can assume the outward appearance of a human being. That is a particularly attractive quality for an alien, especially in a low-budget picture, because then you can hire an actor and claim he is inhabited by an alien and you can save a lot of money on special effects. From "E. T.," there is
Dee Wallace
"Stone, who played Henry Thomass mother in that film. Here she is the equally dubious and harried mother of young"
Scott Grimes
, a plucky kid who goes into battle against the invaders.
The movie takes place in a small town and the surrounding countryside, where the vicious little furballs start attacking everything that moves. They have a lot of tricks at their command: They can eat you like a piranha, shoot darts at you from their foreheads, and curl up into a ball and roll away.
"That leads up to the big scene in the bowling alley, where we expect that someones going to reach down and pick up a critter instead of a ball. But as it turns out, that scene contains other surprises."
"We meet the folks in the area. Theres the friendly farmer "
Billy Green Bush
", his wife Stone, son Grimes and daughter Nadine Van Der Velde. They live on a farm that gives the critters their first haven, and theres the obligatory scary scene where the father goes down in the basement with his flashlight to see whats making the noise."
"Meanwhile, the local lawman that dependably slimy character actor M. Emmet Walsh notices that strange things are happening in his territory. Two strangers from out of town have turned up and started to blast everybody away. And dang if one of them doesnt look exactly like the local minister! The other one soon assumes the outward appearance of the village idiot."
"All of these plot threads move inexorably toward the final showdown, but whats interesting is the way the movie refuses to be just a thriller. The director,"
Stephen Herek
, likes to break the mood occasionally with a one-liner out of left field, and he gives the critters some of the funniest lines. What makes "Critters" more than a ripoff are its humor and its sense of style. This is a movie made by people who must have had fun making it.

"The Hitchhikers Guide to the Galaxy 2005" Cast
Martin Freeman as Arthur Dent
Sam Rockwell as Zaphod Beeblebrox
Mos Def as Ford Prefect
Zooey Deschanel as Trillian
Bill Nighy as Slartibartfast
Anna Chancellor as Questular Rontok
John Malkovich as Humma Kavula
Warwick Davis as Marvin
Alan Rickman as Voice of Marvin
Directed by Garth Jennings
Screenplay by Douglas Adams
Karey Kirkpatrick Based on the book by
Adams Adventure, Comedy, Family, Science Fiction
Rated PG for thematic elements, action and mild language
109 minutes It is possible that "The Hitchhiker\s Guide to the Galaxy" should only be reviewed by, and perhaps only be seen by, people who are familiar with the original material to the point of obsession. My good friend Andy Ihnatko is such a person, and considered the late
Douglas Adams
to be one of only three or four people worthy to be mentioned in the same breath as P.G. Wodehouse. Adams may in fact have been the only worthy person.
Such a Hitchhiker Master would be able to review this movie in terms of its in-jokes, its references to various generations of the
Guide
"universe, its earlier manifestations as books, radio shows, a TV series and the center of a matrix of Web sites. He would understand what the filmmakers have done with Adams material, and how, and why, and whether the film is faithful to the spirit of the original."
"I cannot address any of those issues, and I would rather plead ignorance than pretend to knowledge. If youre familiar with the Adams material, I suggest you stop reading right now before I disappoint or even anger you. All I can do is speak to others like myself, who will be arriving at the movie innocent of"
Hitchhiker
knowledge. To such a person, two things are possible if you see the movie:
1. You will become intrigued by its whimsical and quirky sense of humor, understand that a familiarity with the books is necessary, read one of more of the Hitchhiker books, return to the movie, appreciate it more, and eventually be absorbed into the legion of Adams admirers.
2. You will find the movie tiresomely twee, and notice that it obviously thinks it is being funny at times when you do not have the slightest clue why that should be. You will sense a certain desperation as actors try to sustain a tone that belongs on the page and not on the screen. And you will hear dialogue that preserves the content of written humor at the cost of sounding as if the characters are holding a Douglas Adams reading.
I take the second choice. The movie does not inspire me to learn lots more about
"The Hitchhikers Guide to the Galaxy, The Ultimate Hitchhikers Guide, The Salmon of Doubt,"
and so on. Like "
The Life Aquatic with Steve Zissou
," but with much less visual charm, it is a conceit with little to be conceited about.
The story involves Arthur Dent 
Martin Freeman
, for whom one day there is bad news and good news. The bad news is that Earth is being destroyed to build an intergalactic freeway, which will run right through his house. The good news is that his best friend, Ford Prefect 
Mos Def
" is an alien temporarily visiting Earth to do research for a series of Hitchhikers Guides, and can use his magic ring to beam both of them up to a vast spaceship operated by the Vogons, an alien race that looks like a cross between Jabba the Hutt and Harold Bloom. The Vogons are not a cruel race, apart from the fact that they insist on reading their poetry, which is so bad it has driven people to catatonia."
"Once aboard this ship, Arthur and Ford are hitchhikers themselves, and quickly transfer to another ship named the Heart of Gold, commanded by the Galaxys president Zaphod Beeblebrox "
Sam Rockwell
, who has a third arm that keeps emerging from his tunic like the concealed arm of a samurai warrior, with the proviso that a samurai conceals two arms at the most. Zaphod is two-faced in a most intriguing way. Also on the ship are Trillian 
Zooey Deschanel
, an earthling, and Marvin the Android body by
Warwick Davis
, voice by
Alan Rickman
, who is a terminal kvetcher. There is also a role for
John Malkovich
", who has a human trunk and a lower body apparently made from spindly robotic cranes legs; this makes him a wonder to behold, up to a point."
What these characters do is not as important as what they say, how they say it, and what it will mean to Douglas Adams fans. To me it got old fairly quickly. The movie was more of a revue than a narrative, more about moments than an organizing purpose, and cute to the point that I yearned for some corrosive wit from its second cousin, the Monty Python universe. But of course I do not get the joke. I do not much want to get the joke, but maybe you will. It is not an evil movie. It wants only to be loved, but movies that want to be loved are like puppies in the pound: No matter how earnestly they wag their little tails, you can adopt only one at a time.

"Hells Angels on Wheels 1967" Cast
Adam Roarke as Leader
Jack Nicholson as Poet
Sabrina Scharf as Shill
John Garwood as Jock
Richard Anders as Bull
James Oliver as Gypsy
I. J. Jefferson as Pearl
production Joe Solomon
Directed by Richard Rush
From a screenplay by R. Wright Campbell
Photographed by Leslie Kovacs
Action, Adventure, Crime, Drama, Thriller 95 minutes
"This actually isnt such a bad movie. Sure, its an exploitation picture, manufactured on a low budget to cash in on the current boom in motorcycle gangs. Sure, it has all the obligatory clichés, like an orgy and a couple of brawls and a lot of beer and pot and animalistic behavior. What did you expect?"
Films like "Hell\s Angels on Wheels" are sold on the basis of their titles, their subjects and their shock advertising. They aren\t entered in film festivals. The people who like them will pay to see them whether or not the critic gives his blessing. As a result, their directors have a good deal of freedom if they want it. Sometimes good stuff creeps into exploitation pictures just because nobody cares enough to keep it out.
There\s some good stuff in this one. The actors, for one thing, are convincing as Hell\s Angels. The weakness of Roger Corman\s "Wild Angels" -- which began the current vogue in motorcycle films -- was in the performances of
Peter Fonda
and
Nancy Sinatra
", who came across as middle-class kids who didnt want to get dirty. In this film,"
Adam Roarke
and
John Garwood
get under the greasy skins of their characters and are authentically surly, irresponsible, mean, coarse and human.
Sabrina Scharf
", as the leaders girl, starts out as just another actress who makes you wonder how she keeps her makeup on while raising hell with the angels. But somehow she pulls it off, even though she looks beautiful. I suspect most of the girls who ride with the Angels look more like"
Phyllis Diller
.
Another good thing about the film, surprisingly, is the photography. There\s one shot where the camera moves in and out of focus through a field of green grass and then steals slowly across one of the big, brutal cycles. The contrast has an impact equal to David Lean\s similar shots in "
Doctor Zhivago
" remember the frosty window fading into the field of flowers?. There\s also good footage of the Hell\s Angels weaving down a highway as the zoom lens brings first one and then another into focus. This accomplished camera work suggests that a documentary on cycles might be as poetic, in its way, as the treatment of surfing in "
The Endless Summer
."
All of this is not meant to suggest that "Hell\s Angels on Wheels" is a masterpiece. The plot has holes big enough to drive a Harley-Davidson through. But the film is better than it might have been, and better than it had to be. Take it on its own terms and you might find it interesting.

Bad Teacher 2011 Cast
Cameron Diaz as Elizabeth Halsey
Justin Timberlake as Scott Delacorte
Jason Segel as Russell Gettis
Lucy Punch as Amy Squirrel
John Michael Higgins as Principal
Phyllis Smith as Lynn Davies
Directed by Jake Kasden
Written by Gene Stupnitsky
Lee Eisenberg Comedy
Rated R for sexual content, nudity, language and some drug use
92 minutes "Bad Teacher" immediately brings "
Bad Santa
" to mind and suffers by the comparison. Its bad person is neither bad enough or likable enough. The transgressions of Elizabeth Halsey 
Cameron Diaz
" are more or less what youd expect, but whats surprising is that shes so nasty and unpleasant."
Billy Bob Thornton
, as the Bad Santa, was more outrageously offensive and yet more redeemed by his desperation. He was bad for urgent reasons. Elizabeth seems bad merely as a greedy lifestyle choice.
"As the film opens, Miss Halsey is engaged to a rich guy she leeches on but doesnt love. Shes dumped and has to return to teaching, an occupation she had no talent for or interest in; she passes the time showing DVDs to her students while she naps, drinks and does drugs at her desk. This creates astonishment and indignation in the charmingly named Amy Squirrel "
Lucy Punch
, whose classroom is right across the hall.
The school characters also include new teacher Scott Delacorte 
Justin Timberlake
, amiable but juiceless; veteran teacher Ms. Pavicic Jillian Armenante, a sweet dumpling; the hunky gym teacher Russell Gettis 
Jason Segel
, and the dolphin-obsessed Principal Wally Snur 
John
Michael Higgins
.
Of these characters, the rival played by Lucy Punch is the most colorful, because she\s the most driven and obsessed. The others seem curiously inconsequential, content to materialize in a scene, perform a necessary function and vaporize. There\s no urgency, and that was the one quality "Bad Santa" dripped with.
None of the film\s major characters is a student, which seems odd. Yes, there\s a kid who writes bad poetry and has a crush on the class sexpot, but his desperation seems well within comic bounds. There are no vindictive students, none with aggressive behavior, no little "Omens" in training. The casting of the students seems lacking in imagination, but then what does the screenplay give them to do?
Cameron Diaz has proved that she is gifted with comedy. But here, her Elizabeth is a mean, antagonistic money grubber on autopilot. Where did she come from? Why did she get into teaching in the first place? Has she no heart? There are times in "Bad Santa" when we feel sorry for the poor SOB, but nothing in "Bad Teacher" inspires more than distaste for its lead character.
"Other problems: There is no chemistry, or indeed even much mutual awareness between Diaz and Timberlake. You know those annual Bad Sex Awards for the worst sex scene in a movie? Their dry-humping scene deserves an award for the decade. The scene itself is pathetic. The shot it ends on — the wet spot on Timberlakes blue jeans — had the preview audience recoiling."
"Whole chunks of the plot seem to have gone missing. Were drug charges ever filed against Miss Squirrel in an attemped frame by Miss Halsey? And how, oh, how, can we possibly understand the eventual development between Elizabeth and Russell the gym teacher? You know what that feels like? It feels like they called Diaz and Jason Segal in for one additional day of shooting to provide a preposterous happy ending. Jolly music keeps elbowing its way onto the soundtrack in an unconvincing attempt to cue us that weve seen a good comedy."

The Great White Hype 1996 Cast
Samuel L. Jackson as Rev. Fred Sultan
Jeff Goldblum as Mitchell Kane
Peter Berg as Terry Conklin
Jon Lovitz as Sol
Directed by Reginald Hudlin
Written by Tony Hendra
Ron Shelton Comedy, Drama, Sports Film
Rated R For Language and Brief Sexuality
91 minutes “The Great White Hype” is like a runner who leads for the first part of the race and then runs out of gas. It starts out well, as a wicked satire on professional boxing, and then loses its energy, tires of juggling its characters and ends so abruptly at 91 minutes that it feels like the last reel is missing.
The premise and the performances deserve better. The film stars
Samuel L. Jackson
as the Rev. Fred Sultan, the top promoter in professional boxing and a financial charlatan who quiets his restless champ by giving him another Rolls Royce instead of the millions he owes him.
Damon Wayans
plays the heavyweight champion, James “The Grim Reaper” Roper. And when the gate falls off at his latest title defense, Sultan decides that their only hope for getting rich is to find a Great White Hope to fight the champ. The search for a contender leads to Terry Conklin 
Peter Berg
, who is the lead singer for a Cleveland grunge band named Massive Head Wound. Ten years earlier, as an amateur, he was the only boxer ever to knock out the Reaper. Sultan flies Conklin to Vegas, puts him in training, bribes the boxing commission to declare him a contender, and tries to deal with the White Hope’s peculiarities he wants to write a rock opera about the homeless. The script seems to know a lot about boxing, and no wonder; one of the writers is
Ron Shelton
, a onetime sports writer whose “
Cobb
"” 1994 shows an easy familiarity with professional sports. The movie knows that Conklin would quickly be nicknamed “Irish” Terry Conklin, even though hes not Irish, because “Irish means white in boxing.” It has fun in a sequence where Sultan and his aides review tapes of possible contenders, including one fighter described as “John Waynes nephew” most nephews of a man born 89 years ago would be a little old to be considered contenders, but never mind. And it finds counterpoint in a “Freelance Crusader” character played by"
Jeff Goldblum
, who begins by trying to expose Sultan and ends by being hired by him.
"The movie has lots of riches, but doesnt know how to organize them."
The Goldblum character, for example, replaces a fired Sultan publicist played by
Jon Lovitz
", who has a nice cynical angle on things. It would have been more fun to keep both characters for the whole movie and make them enemies. More backstage machinations all around would have been entertaining. But the movie’s key setup scene, which begins with the Reaper accusing Sultan of theft and ends with the strategy of finding the Great White Hope, is played out before a hotel suite full of people, including the obligatory bevy of beautiful babes. It’s unlikely any fight promoter would discuss his secrets so publicly, and by not respecting things like that, the movie turns satire into sitcom. There are some funny lines. The Reaper learns that Sultan is “the only father figure youve ever had.” The Reaper criticizes his own performance in the ring as if hes an artist “I wanted to finish him with my right instead of my left; it was like painting the Mona Lisa but leaving off the breasts”."
And if you listen carefully to the soundtrack, you hear funny things in the voice-overs, as when Sultan asks which was the highest-paying heavyweight match of all time, and someone says, “Tyson vs. Givens.” Or when another easily missed line creates an intriguing portrait of the Vegas lion-tamer Siegfried.
"But the movies big scene doesnt pay off, and leads to another scene that doesnt work, and then to an ending so abrupt and unsatisfying it feels as if the movie has stopped before it was over. You can see here that the inspiration was correct, that a hard-edged boxing satire would have worked, that the filmmakers had a handle on it, that the actors were ready to deliver--and that somehow the movie TKOd itself."

Crazy Horse 2012 Directed by
Frederick Wiseman Documentary, Foreign
Rated NR intended for adults; no one under 18 admitted
134 minutes The Crazy Horse Saloon in Paris is famous for its "erotic chic" revues, but I found nothing either erotic or chic in this reduction of body parts to geometrical displays.
We have, however, entered "Le Crazy" at a momentous time. Philippe Decoufle, the director of well-received earlier shows, has been brought back on board to reinvent and revise his "Desirs," intended to be more erotic and at the same time more chic than recent productions. Wiseman, now 80, has made nearly 40 documentaries in which his unobtrusive camera observes, simply observes, the way institutions function. His subjects have included a mental hospital, high school, a boxing gym, the Paris Opera Ballet, the welfare system, basic training, policemen at work — and now a nude dance review in Paris.
When the Crazy Horse first opened its doors in 1951, it was rather a sensation: Ten or 12 women, all beautiful, with flawless bodies, presented elaborately choreographed routines in fanciful costumes and became eventually nude, although they did nothing so vulgar as a striptease. This happened not in a sleazy back-street dive, but in an elegant subterranean showroom with red velvet booths or banquettes, every table supplied with its own bottle of champagne in a crystal bucket. It was very expensive, and so instead of sailors on leave, the audience was more likely to contain visiting businessmen.
Sixty years later, nudity is no longer a scarce commodity, but "Le Crazy" is still popular. The girls are augmented by tap dancers, magicians, jugglers and mimes, like a burlesque show. Though pornography put London\s Windmill out of business, it was cheerfully downmarket, and the Crazy offers conspicuous consumption.
Wiseman\s camera goes backstage to observe as Decoufle, a perfectionist, pleads for the club to be closed for a week or two to rehearse "Desirs." Nothing doing. The stockholders wouldn\t stand for it. So the hard-working dancers must perform and rehearse on the same days. We see their elaborate supporting staff of stage managers, sound and lighting engineers, and the well-oiled machinery that assures every patron has a photo taken, offered for sale at the end of the show. There are also souvenir T-shirts, wine buckets and so on.
We see auditions of hopeful dancers, told frankly they are being evaluated for their bodies and not their dancing. Indeed they are. Every woman on the stage seems to have an identical body, perhaps so that individual differences will not distract from the mathematical symmetry of the choreography. Long legs, saucy buttocks, a few pounds over "thin," with firm B-cup breasts. No As, no Cs. It must be nearly impossible for a given dancer to emerge as the star of the show, although one does an aerial ballet at the end of a thick rope that rivals Cirque du Soleil.
"I especially enjoyed two of Wisemans subjects who seemed particularly Parisian. One was Decoufles second in command, Ali Mahdavi, the artistic director. A small, intense man with a shaven head, he says he has been passionately in love with the Crazy all of his life, and there is no reason to doubt him. As he launches into ecstatic peals of poetic praise for the shows, Decoufle stares into space, has a sip of water, seems on the edge of smiling. No dance performance in history has been as good as Mahdavi says this one is."
My other favorite was Fifi Chachnil, who owns a little costume company named, of course, Fifi. She constructs the costumes for the Crazy Horse, is busy outfitting the dancers to be both horses and riders. As long as there are little shops named Fifi, there will always be a Paris.

"Theres Something About Mary 1998" Cast
Ben Stiller as Ted
Cameron Diaz as Mary
Matt Dillon as Healy
Chris Elliott as Dom
Directed by Peter
Bobby Farrelly Written by
Ed Decter John J. Strauss
The Farrellys Comedy, Romance
Rated R For Strong Comic Sexual Content and Language
119 minutes What a blessed relief is laughter. It flies in the face of manners, values, political correctness and decorum. It exposes us for what we are, the only animal with a sense of humor. "There\s Something About Mary" is an unalloyed exercise in bad taste, and contains five or six explosively funny sequences. OK, five explosive, one moderate.
"I love it when a movie takes control, sweeps away my doubts and objections, and compels me to laugh. Im having a physical reaction, not an intellectual one. Theres such freedom in laughing so loudly. I feel cleansed."
"There\s Something About Mary" is the latest work by Peter and
Bobby Farrelly
, brothers whose earlier credits include "
Dumb and Dumber
" and "
Kingpin
." Good taste is not their strong suit. "Dumb and Dumber" includes a scene where a blind boy realizes his parakeet\s head is held on with Scotch tape. "Kingpin" includes a scene where a bowler\s artificial hand gets stuck in the ball and rolls down the alley, flop flop flop.
"Now here is a movie about a woman who is beautiful, sunny, good and pure, and inspires a remarkable array of creeps to fall in love with her. Theres ... just something about her. Mary is played by"
Cameron Diaz
as a high school knockout who amazes the geeky Ted 
Ben Stiller
 by asking him to the prom, even though he has pounds of braces on his teeth. "I have a thing about braces," she muses, long after. Ted turns up proudly for the date, only to set off the first of the movie\s uproariously funny sequences when he asks to use the toilet and then somehow catches in his zipper that part of the male anatomy one least wants to think about in connection with zippers. "Is it the frank or the beans?" asks Mary\s solicitous stepfather. In a lesser film, that would be that: The directors would expect us to laugh at his misfortune, and the plot would roll on. Not the Farrelly Brothers. When they get something going, they keep on building, daring themselves to top each outrage. I won\t reveal how the scene develops, apart from noting the perfect timing involved with the unexpected closeup.
Thirteen years pass. Ted is still in love with Mary. He hires a sleazy investigator named Healy 
Matt Dillon
 to track her down. Healy, wearing one of those mustaches that shout "distrust me!," finds her in Miami, discovers she is an unbelievable babe who is still single and decides to grab her for himself. He tells Ted that she weighs 250 pounds, has four children by three fathers and has just shipped out for Japan as a mail-order bride.
"Healys trick is to eavesdrop on Marys conversations, so hell know just what she wants to hear. Among the things most important to her is her retarded brother Warren W. Earl Brown, who doesnt like to have his ears touched. Healy poses as the person of her dreams an architect with a condo in Nepal, who loves to work with retarded people, but he raises the suspicions of another of her suitors, Tucker "
Lee Evans
, who is an architect who uses crutches. Maybe.
Further plot description would be pointless. The plot exists, like all screwball plots, simply to steer us from one gag to the next. In the TV ads, you may already have seen the moment when the dog of Mary\s deeply tanned neighbor needs to have its heart restarted. That\s because the dog has been tranquilized. There also is a scene where the dog is on speed, and his human target does things with walls and furniture not seen since Donald O\Connor\s "Make \Em Laugh" sequence in "
"Singin in the Rain"
." Then there are the peculiar and intimate preparations Ted goes through in anticipation of his first date with Mary. I have paused here at the keyboard for many minutes, trying to decide how to describe them a in a family newspaper, and b without spoiling the fun. I cannot. I will simply observe in admiration that after the scene explodes in disbelieving, prolonged laughter, the Farrellys find a way to blindside us with a completely unanticipated consequence that sets us off all over again.
Among the other characters in the movie are
Chris Elliott
, as Dom, a friend of Ted\s, who has a nervous skin condition "Do you know what it feels like to have a whitehead on your eyeball?", and Magda 
Lin Shaye
, the neighbor, whose tan makes her look like she\s been put through the same process that produces Slim Jims. Magda is funny in a bizarre over the top way, but Dom is more creepy than funny, or is it just that we\re afraid we\ll catch his skin rash? Stanley Kauffmann, the great film critic of The New Republic, was on Charlie Rose\s show the other night, sharing the discoveries of 40 years as a film critic. What he has noticed over the years, he said, is that we are getting more good dramatic films than in the old days--but fewer good entertainments. It is easier to excel at drama than at comedy. I have no idea if Kauffmann will like "There\s Something About Mary" but his point applies for me: After months and months of comedies that did not make me laugh, here at last is one that did.

Dark Eyes 1987 Cast
Marcello Mastroianni as Romano
Silvano Mangano as Elisa
Marthe Keller as Tina
Elena Sofonova as Anna
Pina Cei "as Elisas mother"
Vsevolod Larionov as Pavel
Directed by Nikita Mikhalkov
Produced by "Silvia DAmico Bendico"
Carlo Cucchi Screenplay by
Alexander Adabachian Mikhalkov
Photographed by Franco
Edited by Enzo Meniconi
Music by Francis Lai
Comedy, Drama, Romance Rated NR
117 minutes Some stories need to be told after they are over. We need to know that all the events are past and gone, in order to feel the same nostalgia as the storyteller. When a story is happening "now," there is always the possibility of surprise and happiness. But when a story happened "then," and it is a love story, then even the happy moments feel bittersweet, and of course that is the whole point of the story.
"Dark Eyes" is a story told by a man who sits at a table in the lounge of an ocean liner, the bottle in front of him, the glass in his hand, his voice steady as if he has rehearsed these same facts many times before. He is a middle-age man with sad eyes and a weary face. His listener is about the same age, but not so sad and not so weary.
"Neither one seems to much care about the ships destination. The man telling the story is"
Marcello Mastroianni
, the most complete of movie actors, his face never seeming composed for the screen but acting simply as a window for his words. He tells the stranger that once he was married, comfortably if not ecstatically, to a rich wife 
Silvano Mangano
.
They were not in love, but they were content with one another. Then he went on a visit to a spa, and there he saw a young lady, and danced with her, and fell in love with her, and had one of those holiday romances that fade like postcards in the memory. After all, nothing could come of it; they were both married.
The problem with this romance, Mastroianni tells his listener, is that it did not fade. Back home again, he found he was still in love with the woman 
Elena Sofonova
. She grew stronger in his memory. He could not forget her. She was a Russian, and eventually he went to Russia in search of her, and found her, and they shared perfect love and vowed to divorce their spouses to marry each other. She went to tell her husband, and he returned to Italy to tell his wife, but at home he found his wife had lost all of her money and his sense of loyalty was such that he could not leave her under those circumstances, and so...
Mastroianni continues with his story, but I will stop here, before all of the twists and turns, the ironies and the final heartbreak. "Dark Eyes" tells one of those stories where you think you know everything, but you do not, and at the end of the story you know that everyone is very unhappy but you cannot see precisely what they should have done differently. The movie is based on stories by
Anton Chekhov
and has been directed by a Russian,
Nikita Mikhalkov
", who is not afraid of large romantic gestures and tragic coincidences. You realize after awhile that it doesnt matter that Mastroianni can do nothing, that his tragedy is in the past; the telling of the story is the whole point, and he travels the world with his sad tale, telling it probably again and again, for the whole importance of his life has been reduced to his great loss."
This is a beautiful film, lavishly shot on location at Italian and Russian spas and in great houses. The 19th century period is important, not simply because it recalls a time before telephones which could have solved the whole tragedy, but because it recalls a state of mind before telephones a time when people did not much believe in easy solutions. The movie is intriguing because of its moral complexity. After it\s over, you find yourself asking hard questions about who did right and who did wrong, and you\re confronted with the ironic possibility that maybe it didn\t matter, that maybe everyone was doomed from the start. The ending of this film is a real stunner. If you see "Dark Eyes," ask yourself this question afterward: How would it have felt if the movie had provided what we anticipate will be the last scene, but isn\t? Would it have been simply corny? Or too heartbreaking to be endured?

Jackie Brown 1997 Cast
Pam Grier as Jackie Brown
Samuel L. Jackson as Ordell
Robert De Niro as Louis
Robert Forster as Max
Bridget Fonda as Melanie
Written and Directed by Quentin Tarantino
Action, Crime, Drama, Thriller Rated R
Violence, Language, Some Sexuality 155 minutes
"I like the moment when the veins pop out on Ordells forehead. Its a quiet moment in the front seat of a van, hes sitting there next to Louis, hes just heard that hes lost his retirement fund of $500,000, and hes thinking hard."
Quentin Tarantino
lets him think. Just holds the shot, nothing happening. Then Ordell looks up and says, "It\s Jackie Brown.\\ He\s absolutely right. She\s stolen his money. In the movies people like him hardly ever need to think. The director has done all their thinking for them. One of the pleasures of "Jackie Brown,\\ Tarantino\s new film, based on a novel by
Elmore Leonard
, is that everybody in the movie is smart. Whoever is smartest will live.
Jackie 
Pam Grier
" knows she needs to pull off a flawless scam, or shell be dead. Ordell "
Samuel L. Jackson
 will pop her, just like that guy they found in the trunk of a car. So she thinks hard, and so do a bail bondsman 
Robert Forster
 and an ATF agent 
Michael Keaton
". Everyone has a pretty good idea of exactly whats happening: They just cant figure it out fast enough to stay ahead of Jackie. The final scenes unfold in a cloud of delight, as the audience watches all of the threads come together."
This is the movie that proves Tarantino is the real thing, and not just a two-film wonder boy. It\s not a retread of "
Reservoir Dogs
" or "
Pulp Fiction
," but a new film in a new style, and it evokes the particular magic of Elmore Leonard--who elevates the crime novel to a form of sociological comedy. There is a scene here that involves the ex-con Louis 
Robert De Niro
" and Ordells druggie mistress "
Bridget Fonda
" discussing a photograph pinned to the wall, and its so perfectly written, timed and played that I applauded it."
Tarantino has a lot of good scenes in this movie. The scene where one character lures another to his death by tempting him with chicken and waffles. The scene where a nagging woman makes one suggestion too many. The scene where a man comes around in the morning to get back the gun a woman borrowed the night before. The moment when Jackie Brown uses one line of dialogue, perfectly timed, to solve all of her problems.
This movie is about texture, not plot. It has a plot, all right, but not as the whole purpose of the film. Jackie Brown, 44 years old, is an attendant on the worst airline in North America, and supplements her meager salary by smuggling cash from Mexico to Los Angeles for Ordell, who is a gun dealer. Beaumont 
Chris Tucker
", one of Ordells hirelings, gets busted by an ATF agent Keaton and a local cop "
Michael Bowen
". So they know Jackie is coming in with $500,000 of Ordells money, and bust her."
"Ordell has Jackie bailed out by Max Cherry Robert Forster, a bondsman who falls in love the moment he sees her, but keeps that knowledge to himself. Jackie knows Ordell will kill her before she can cut a deal with the law. Maybe she could kill Ordell first, but shes not a killer, and besides, she has a better idea. The unfolding of this idea, which involves a lot of improvisation, occupies the rest of the movie."
"At the heart of the story is the affection that grows between Jackie and Max. In a lesser thriller, there would be a sex scene. Tarantino reasonably believes that during a period when everyones in danger and no ones leveling about their real motives, such an episode would be unlikely. Max silently guesses part of what Jackie is up to and provides a little crucial help. Jackie takes the help without quite acknowledging it. And their attraction stays on an unspoken level, which makes it all the more intriguing."
In "Jackie Brown,\\ as in "Pulp Fiction,\\ we get the sense that the characters live in spacious worlds and know a lot of people in most thrillers the characters only know one another. Ordell has women stashed all over Southern California, including a dim runaway from the South who he keeps in Glenwood, which he has told her is Hollywood. Max Cherry has a partner Tommy "Tiny\\ Lister Jr. who is referred to long before he goes into action. The sides of the film\s canvas are free to expand when it\s necessary.
If Tarantino\s strengths are dialogue and plotting, his gift is casting. Pam Grier, the goddess of 1970s tough-girl pictures, here finds just the right note for Jackie Brown; she\s tired and desperate. Robert Forster has the role of a career as the bail bondsman, matter of fact about his job and the law; he\s a plausible professional, not a plot stooge. Jackson, as Ordell, does a harder, colder version of his hit man in "Pulp Fiction,\\ and once again uses the N-word like an obsession or a mantra that gets a little old. De Niro, still in a longtime convict\s prison trance, plays Louis as ingratiatingly stupid. Bridget Fonda\s performance is so good, it\s almost invisible; her character\s lassitude and contempt coexist with the need to be high all the time.
A lot of crime films play like they were written by crossword puzzle fans who fill in the easy words and then call the hot line for the solution. The solution is always: Abandon the characters and end with a chase and a shootout. Tarantino leaves the hardest questions for last, hides his moves, conceals his strategies in plain view, and gives his characters dialogue that is alive, authentic and spontaneous.
You savor every moment of "Jackie Brown.\\ Those who say it is too long have developed cinematic attention deficit disorder. I wanted these characters to live, talk, deceive and scheme for hours and hours.

A History of Violence 2005 Cast
Viggo Mortensen as Tom Stall
Maria Bello as Edie Stall
William Hurt as Richie Cusack
Ed Harris as Carl Fogarty
Ashton Holmes as Jack Stall
Heidi Hayes as Sarah Stall
Peter MacNeill as Sheriff Sam Carney
Stephen McHattie as Leland Jones
Greg Bryk as Billy Orser
Directed by David Cronenberg
Written by Josh Olson
Action, Crime, Drama, Thriller Rated R
for brutal violence, graphic sexuality, nudity, language and some drug use 96 minutes
David Cronenberg
says his title "A History of Violence" has three levels: It refers 1 to a suspect with a long history of violence; 2 to the historical use of violence as a means of settling disputes, and 3 to the innate violence of Darwinian evolution, in which better-adapted organisms replace those less able to cope. "I am a complete Darwinian," says Cronenberg, whose new film is in many ways about the survival of the fittest -- at all costs.
In a small Indiana town, Tom Stall 
Viggo Mortensen
" runs one of those friendly little diners that acts as the village crossroads and clearing-house. Hes the kind of guy everybody likes, married to a lawyer named Edie "
Maria Bello
, father of the teenager Jack 
Ashton Holmes
 and young Sarah 
Heidi Hayes
. He has one of those middle American accents in which every word translates into "I\m just folks."
So persuasive are these Indiana scenes that, despite the movie’s
opening moments, we wonder if Cronenberg has abandoned his own history of violence and decided to make a small-town slice of life: A Capra picture, perhaps, with Viggo Mortensen as Jimmy Stewart. Then all hell breaks loose. Two tough guys enter the diner to try a stickup. They have guns, mean business, threaten the customers and a waitress. Moving so quickly he seems to have been practicing the scene as choreography, Tom Stall takes out the two guys and ends up on the local front pages as a hero.
"He makes a shy hero. He doesnt want to give interviews or talk about what he has done, and there are strained moments in his household as his wife worries about a seismic shift in his mood, and his son cant understand an unstated change in their relationship. Read no further if you want to preserve the reasons for these changes."
Tom Stall, as it turns out, has a secret he has been guarding for 20 years. He is not named Tom Stall but Joey, is not from Indiana but from Philadelphia, has tried to start a new life in a small town and failed because of this unexpected publicity. Soon more strangers arrive in town: Carl Fogarty 
Ed Harris
" turns up with two hard men in his employ. Something really bad has happened to Carl earlier in life, and we dont want to know how his face got that way."
Tom Stall has transformed himself so completely into a small town family man that maybe there were years when he believed the story himself. The arrival of Fogarty makes that an illusion impossible to sustain, and he must return to Philadelphia and to an extraordinary scene with a man named Richie Cusack 
William Hurt
, whose role in Tom or Joey\s life I will leave for you to discover. Let me say that Hurt has done a lot of good acting in a lot of intriguing roles, but during his brief screen time in "A History of Violence" he sounds notes we have not heard before.
Another important element in the plot involves the Stall family, especially Edie the wife and Jack the son. What do you do when you discover that your husband or father has concealed everything about his early life? Was he lying to you, or protecting you? Did you love someone who did not really exist?
Cronenberg is a director with a wide range, usually played by the left hand. He has ventured into horror, the macabre, science fiction, satire and the extremely peculiar. In his 2003 film "
Spider
," he starred
Ralph Fiennes
as a mental patient in a halfway house whose reality balances between everyday details and haunting memories of his past. "
Dead Ringers
" 1988 has
Jeremy Irons
in a dual role as twins, one not so nice, the other not so nice, either. "Dead Zone" 1983 has
Christopher Walken
losing five years of his life and becoming a different kind of person. These shifts in personal reality seem fascinating to Cronenberg.
But what is Cronenberg saying about Tom, or Joey? Which life is the real one? The nature of Joey\s early life was established by the world he was born into. His second life was created by conscious choice. Which is dominant, nature or nurture? Hyde, or Jekyll? Are we kidding ourselves when we think we can live peacefully? Is our peace purchased at the price of violence done elsewhere? In "A History of Violence," it all comes down to this: If Tom Stall had truly been the cheerful small-town guy he pretended to be, he would have died in that diner. It was Joey who saved him. And here is the crucial point: Because of Joey, the son Jack, makes discoveries about himself that he might not have ever needed or wanted to make.
"A History of Violence" seems deceptively straightforward, coming from a director with Cronenberg\s quirky complexity. But think again. This is not a movie about plot, but about character. It is about how people turn out the way they do, and about whether the world sometimes functions like a fool\s paradise. I never give a moment\s thought about finding water to drink. In New Orleans a few weeks ago, would I have been willing to steal from stores or fight other people for drinkable water? Yes, if it meant life for myself and my family. But I would have made a pitiful thief and fighter, and probably would have failed.
Since I am wandering, let me wander farther: At the Toronto Film Festival I saw a screening of "
Nanook of the North
," the great documentary about Eskimos surviving in the hostile arctic wilderness. They live because they hunt and kill. Of the three levels "A History of Violence" refers to, I think Cronenberg is most interested in the third, in the survival of the fittest. Not the good, the moral, the nice, but the fittest. The movie is based on the graphic novels by John Wagner and Vince Locke. It could also be illuminated by
The Selfish Gene,
"by Richard Dawkins. I think thats why Cronenberg gives his hero a son: To show that Jack inherited what he did not ever suspect his father possessed."

What Lies Beneath 2000 Cast
Michelle Pfeiffer as Claire
Harrison Ford as Norman
Katharine Towne as Caitlin
Miranda Otto as Mary
Directed by Robert Zemeckis
Written by Clark Gregg
Based On The Story by Sarah Kernochian
Drama, Horror, Mystery, Suspense, Thriller Rated PG-13
For Terror/Violence, Sensuality and Brief Language 130 minutes
"What Lies Beneath" opens with an hour or so of standard thriller scare tactics, done effectively, and then plops into a morass of absurdity. Lacking a smarter screenplay, it milks the genuine skills of its actors and director for more than it deserves, and then runs off the rails in an ending more laughable than scary. Along the way, yes, there are some good moments.
Michelle Pfeiffer
stars as Claire Spencer, the happily married wife of Dr. Norman Spencer 
Harrison Ford
", a scientist. Theyre renovating his old family house on the shores of a lake--a house, which, when she is home alone, seems haunted--with doors that open by themselves, picture frames that keep falling over, a tub that fills itself, a dog that barks at invisible menaces and a neighbor who has possibly murdered his wife."
"Gruff, no-nonsense Dr. Spencer of course dismisses his wifes fears and sends her to a psychiatrist. All of her early scenes are reasonable enough, even if the doors open themselves two or three times more than necessary. Its when we start to learn the motivation for the manifestations that we grow first restless, finally incredulous."
"Theres a bag of tricks that skillful horror directors use, and theyre employed here by"
Robert Zemeckis
"Back To The Future," "
Forrest Gump
", who has always wanted, he says, to make a suspense film--"perhaps the kind of film Hitchcock would have done in his day," according to his producer, Jack Rapke. Hitchcock would not, however, have done this film in his day or any other day, because Hitchcock would have insisted on rewrites to remove the supernatural and explain the action in terms of human psychology, however abnormal.
Zemeckis does quote Hitchcock; there\s a scene where Pfeiffer spies on a neighbor with binoculars and is shocked to see the neighbor spying back, and we are reminded of "
Rear Window
." He also uses such dependable devices as harmless people who suddenly enter the frame and startle the heroine. And mirrors that suddenly reveal figures reflected in them. And shots where we are looking at a character in front of windows, and the camera slowly pans, causing us to expect a face to appear in the window.
All of these devices are used with journeyman thoroughness in "What Lies Beneath," but they are only devices, and we know it. Late in the film, when the heroine walks close to the hand of a character who is assumed to be dead, the audience laughs because it knows--or thinks it knows--that in a horror film no one is ever really dead on the first try. Such devices at least involve the physical world and the laws of nature as we understand them. What\s happening in the supernatural scenes I leave you to decide; I think some of them are supposed to be real, others hallucinations, others seen in different ways by different characters.
"Pfeiffer is very good in the movie; she is convincing and sympathetic and avoids the most common problem for actors in horror films--she doesnt overreact. Her character remains self-contained and resourceful, and the sessions with the psychiatrist "
Joe Morton
" are masterpieces of people behaving reasonably in the face of Forces Beyond Their Comprehension. Ford is the most reliable of actors, capable of many things, here required to be Harrison Ford. The Law of Economy of Character Development requires that his husband be other than he seems, since he isnt needed as his wifes confidant and sidekick Diana Scarwids character fills that slot. As for the possibly wife-killing neighbor, I can forgive that red herring almost anything because it pays off in a flawless sight gag at a party."
I\ve tried to play fair and not give away plot elements. That\s more than the ads have done. The trailer of this movie thoroughly demolishes the surprises; if you\ve seen the trailer, you know what the movie is about, and all of the suspense of the first hour is superfluous for you, including major character revelations. Don\t directors get annoyed when they create suspense and the marketing sabotages their efforts? The modern studio approach to trailers is copied from those marketing people who stand in the aisles of supermarkets, offering you a bite of sausage on a toothpick. When you taste it, you know everything there is to be known about the sausage, except what it would be like to eat all of it. Same with the trailer for "What Lies Beneath." I like the approach where you can smell the sausage but not taste it. You desire it just as much, but the actual experience is still ahead of you. Trailers that give us a smell and not a taste; that\s what we need.

The Queen of Versailles 2012 Directed by
Lauren Greenfield Documentary
Rated PG for thematic elements and language
100 minutes When we\re discussing who to invite to a dinner party, my wife Chaz and I sometimes use the shorthand, "good value for money," which indicates guests expected to be entertaining. The Siegels would qualify.
Let me just place some background on the table.
David Siegel
is a billionaire who founded Westgate Resorts, "the largest time-share company on the planet," I believe he says. Jackie is his third wife, and although she is clearly a trophy and has the boobs to prove it, she is also the mother of seven of his eight children, was born into humble circumstances, refused to become somebody\s secretary and earned an engineering degree instead.
"Their new home in Florida has 10 kitchens and a bowling alley. I never learned how many rooms it has, but while its under construction, she gives a tour to"
Lauren Greenfield
, the film\s director — and when Greenfield asks, "Will this be your bedroom?" Jackie says, "Oh, no … this is my closet."
"Siegel is in the middle of constructing a towering Westgate flagship in Las Vegas when the housing crisis strikes and almost wipes him out. There is rich irony as he complains that greedy bankers tempted him with cheap money to take out loans he couldnt repay — which is exactly what his sales force has been persuading time-share customers to do."
It\s rather endearing that Siegel will look straight at the camera and make such a complaint, unaware of or indifferent to its irony. He seems inclined to tell the truth. He boasts that his money got George W. Bush elected, and then adds with a twinkle in his eyes, "by extra-legal means." He confesses that he lost some enthusiasm for Bush after his invasion of Iraq.
But it\s Jackie who steals the show. She isn\t one of your snobby creatures from reality TV. She has a warm smile, a confiding manner and a sort of "I Love Lucy" ditziness as she cluelessly wrestles with the problem of a home with seven kids in residence, countless domestic staff and innumerable little white dogs. When the market crashes, the Siegels put the house up for sale, and David struggles desperately to save his Las Vegas tower. All but one domestic is laid off, and dog poop relentlessly builds up. David instructs Jackie to cut way, way down on her compulsive shopping, so she switches to Wal-Mart, where nevertheless she loads up shopping carts with so many needless purchases, it takes a fleet of SUVs to haul them home.
Some of Jackie\s dialogue is so good it would distinguish a sitcom. Talking to the clerk behind the rental car counter, she asks, "What\s the name of my driver?" David, meanwhile, retreats into a sort of man cave, his study with its big-screen TV, where he watches the financial news, telephones bankers and investors, and vows he will save the Las Vegas property, whatever it takes him.
You can\t hate these people, and it\s clear that Lauren Greenfield didn\t — although, to be sure, they were giving her incredible access to a lifestyle most people, even "rich" people, can barely imagine. What you can do is deplore them. It\s a shame they haven\t thought of more productive and useful ways to spend their fortune. Still, to be sure, their fortune is based on income from time-share buyers who had the same problem.

Out of Africa 1985 Cast
Meryl Streep as Karen
Robert Redford as Denys
Klaus Maria Brandauer as Bror
Drama, Romance Rated PG
153 minutes Earlier there was a moment when a lioness seemed about to attack, but did not. The baroness had been riding her horse on the veld, had dismounted, had lost her rifle when the horse bolted. Now the lioness seemed about to change, when behind her a calm voice advised the baroness not to move one inch. "She\ll go away," the voice said, and indeed the lioness did skulk away after satisfying its curiosity. That scene sets up the central moment in
Sydney Pollack
\s "Out of Africa." It comes somewhat later in the film. The baroness is on safari with the man who owns the cool voice, a big game hunter named Denys. They happen upon a pride of lions. Once again, the man assumes charge.
He will protect them. But then a lion unexpectedly charges from another direction, and it is up to the baroness to fell it, with one shot that must not miss, and does not. After the man and woman are safe, the man sees that the woman has bitten her lip in anxiety. He reaches out and touches the blood. Then they hold each other tightly. If you can sense the passion in that scene, then you may share my emjoyment of "Out of Africa," which is one of the great recent epic romances. The baroness is played by
Meryl Streep
. The Hunter is
Robert Redford
. These are high-voltage stars, and when their chemistry is wrong for romances as Streep\s was for "
Falling in Love
," and Redford\s was for "
The Natural
", it is very wrong. This time, it is right.
"The movie is based on the life and writings of Baroness Karen Blixen, a Danish woman who, despairing that she would be single forever, married her lovers brother, moved out to Kenya in East Africa, ran a coffee plantation on the slopes of Kilimanjaro and later, when the plantation was bankrupt and the dream was finshed, wrote books about her experiences under the name Isak Dinesan. Her books are glories - especially Out of Africa and Seven Gothic Tales - but they are not the entire inspiration for this movie. What we have here is an old-fashioned, intelligent, thoughtful love story, told with enough care and attention that we really get involved in the passions among the characters."
"In addition to the people Streep and Redford play, there is a third major character, Bror, the man she marries, played by Klaus Maria Brandmuer. He is a smiling, smooth faced enigmatic man who likes her well enough, after his fashion, but never seems quite equal to her spirit. After he gives her syphills and she returns to Denmark for treatment, she is just barely able to tolerate his behavior - after all, he did not ask to marry her - until a New Years Eve when he flaunts his infidelity, and she asks him to move out."
He turns up once more asking for money, after Redford has moved his things into the baroness\ farmhouse. The two men have a classic exchange. Brandauer: "You should have asked permission." Redford: "I did. She said yes."
The movie takes place during the strange blip in history when the countries of East Africa - Kenya, Uganda, the Rhodesias - were attracting waves of European settlers discontented with life at home in the years around World War I. The best land available to them was in the so-called "white highlands" of Kenya, so high up the air was cooler and there were fewer insects, and some luck could be had with cattle and certain crops.
The settlers who lived there soon settled into a hard-drinking , high-living regime that has been documented in many books; they were sort of "Dallas" crossed with "
Mandingo
." The movie steers relatively clear of the social life, except for a scene where Streep is snubbed at the local club, a few other scenes in town, and an extraordinary moment when she goes down on her knees before the British governor to plead for land for the Africans who live on her bankrupt farm.
Before that moment, she has not seemed particularly interested in Africans, except for an old overseer who becomes a close friend and this is not true to the spirit of her book, where Africans are of great importance to her. Instead, she is much more involved in the waves of passion that sweep through her life like a comet on a trajectory of its own.
He wants to move "his things" in, but does not want to move himself in. He wants commitment, but personal freedom. His ambiguity toward her is something like his ambiguity toward the land, which he penetrates with truck and airplane, leading tours while all the time bemoaning the loss of the virgin veld.
Because "Out of Africa" is intelligently written, directed and acted, however, we do not see his behavior as simply willful and spoiled, but as part of the contradictions he needs to stay an individual in a land where white society is strictly regimented. The Baroness Blixen needs no such shields; she embodies sufficient contradictions on her own. In a land where whites are foreigners, she is a foreign white. She writes and thinks instead of gossiping and drinking. She runs her own farm. She scorns local gossip. In this hunter, she finds a spirit equal to her own, which is eventually the undoing of their relationship.
"Out of Africa" is a great movie to look at, breathtakingly filmed on location. It is a movie with the courage to be about complex, sweeping emotions, and to use the star power of its actors without apology. Sydney Pollack has worked with Redford before - notably in another big-sky epic, "Jeremiah Johnson." He understands the special, somewhat fragile mystique of his star, who has a tendency to seem overprotective of his own image. In the wrong hands, Redford can look narcissistic. This time, he seems to have much to be narcissistic about.

Police, Adjective 2009 Cast
Dragos Bucur as Cristi
Vlad Ivanov as Anghelache
Irina Saulescu as Anca
Ion Stoica as Nelu
Marian Ghenea as Prosecutor
Directed and written by Corneliu Porumboiu
Drama, Foreign Rated NR
115 minutes "Police, Adjective" is a peculiar title for a film. The posters at Cannes 2009 read "
Politist, adjective."
With a period, and a gun on top of a dictionary. A critic from Romania, sitting next to us before the screening, explained that the purity of the language is enforced as fervently in Romania as in France, and "police," of course, is properly a noun.
And there you have the movie which won both the Un Certain Regard jury prize and the Critics\ Prize at Cannes 2009. Its hero is a young cop assigned to nab drug users, and its surprisingly effective key scene involves an argument with his captain over the dictionary definitions of the words "conscience" and "justice." This may not sound exciting, but it was welcome after legions of cop movies in which such arguments are orchestrated with the f-word.
"The cops name is Cristi "
Dragos Bucur
, and he\s been assigned to follow a 16-year-old schoolboy suspected of smoking pot. The kid does smoke pot. He often smokes it with a pal and a girlfriend. Does he "supply" it? If he has it and offers a toke to them, I suppose the definition of that would be supplying.
The cop is recently married, and he and his wife spent their honeymoon in Prague. He doesn\t want to follow this kid. If he arrests him, the kid gets locked up for eight to 15 years. "That would ruin his life," he tells the captain. "Did you force him to smoke pot?" No, the cop says, but in Prague, it\s smoked openly on the streets, and the cops look the other way.
The captain patiently explains that in Romania smoking pot is against the law, and the duty of the police is to enforce the law. "I don\t want to arrest him," Cristi says. "It\s against my conscience." Then the dictionary comes out. My dictionary, which I believe the captain was also using, although in Romanian, has only one definition:
"conscience noun, an inner feeling or voice viewed as acting as a guide to the rightness or wrongness of ones behavior."
"You know the rest. It isnt a policemans job to act on his inner voices and feelings. Its his job to enforce the law."
"This movie I suspect comes with a lot of baggage. Romania under the Ceausescu regime 1965-1989 started out promisingly but grew into a repressive police state under which perhaps 2 million people were killed. Ceausescus police were often only enforcing the law. Romania has a population of 21 million, but its in the nature of things that many people knew the cops, who were sometimes arresting them or their neighbors. What choice did a cop have?"
I speculate that
Corneliu Porumboiu
", born in 1975, who wrote and directed the film, grew up in a nation shadowed by those memories, and that his film, to some degree, is about that time. It is also a low-key, observant record of a universal dilemma among people in authority: How do you do your duty when your inner voice tells you its wrong?"
"The visual style, foregrounding drab areas of a small industrial city, is flat and realistic. We never really meet the young suspect. Cristi doesnt confide in his wife. His office mate knows what he feels, but stays out of it. Only the captain and a prosecutor will discuss it with him. Both are more than willing. Both are of an age when they would have started their careers under Ceausescu. They depend on the strict definition of the law because they can use that as a refuge from their inner voices. Cristi understands this, and thats why the debate over the dictionary is so intense. They arent talking about definitions. Theyre talking about the past, present and future of their nation."

House Party 2 1991 Cast
Christopher Reid as Kid
Christopher Martin as Play
Paul Anthony as Stab
Zilla Brian George as George
Lucien George as Pee-Wee
Tisha Campbell as Sidney
Queen Latifah as Zora
Produced and Directed by Doug McHenry
George Jackson Photographed by
Francis Kenny Written by
Rusty Cundieff Daryl G. Nickens
Edited by Joel Goodman
Comedy Rated R
For Language and Sensuality 94 minutes
"House Party 2" is a genial and good-humored sequel to the surprise 1990 hit, but not much more. It contains a lot of listenable music, some of it by wonderfully energetic rap artist
Queen Latifah
", who turns up as the heroines roommate. And"
Christopher Reid
is back again as the hero, a bright black student with a sky-high haircut who wants to do the right thing but is forever getting into trouble.
But like a lot of sequels, it seems to have no real reason for existence, aside from the success of the original film.
"
House Party
" was essentially a musical, ending with a long sequence of wall-to-wall singing and dancing at a party the hero, Kid, was dying to attend. He had a problem: His strict disciplinarian father 
Robin Harris
 was determined to raise his son responsibly.
The relationship between the father and son provided a grounding for the movie, and made it more thoughtful and emotionally sincere.
Robin Harris died suddenly just as his good reviews were appearing for "House Party" and other projects, and his presence is missed in the sequel. There\s some attempt to bring him back in spirit, through the device of a photograph that sometimes comes to life and provides advice to the son, but basically this is a movie without a relationship at its center, and so the decisions of the hero don\t seem to make as much difference to anyone.
Reid stars once again as Kid, who goes off to college with scholarship money provided by the congregation of his church. But he loses the money to some slick con-artist record promoters. And so then he has to try to talk his way into school, past an unfriendly dean and various other enemies. At the same time, he tries to talk his way into the heart of a co-ed 
Tisha Campbell
, and past her stern and Politically Correct roommate Latifah.
"It goes without saying that the solution to his financial problems is to hold another house party, this time in the faculty dining room. Admission is $10 for men, free for women who wear nightwear; sexual politics havent arrived on this campus yet."
Hundreds of students turn up wearing elaborate costumes, and dance the night away, undeterred by the same three goons who harassed Kid in the first movie, and are now campus security guards.
Christopher Reid is an engaging actor who doesn\t push this lightweight material too hard, and the other performances are all well within the tradition of teenage comedy. But I was disappointed by the film. The first "House Party" was produced and directed by Reginald and
Warrington Hudlin
", who included some thoughtful material a subplot, for example, in which a young man has to decide if hell date a girl even though she lives in a low-status housing project."
This time, the film was produced and directed by
Doug McHenry
and
George Jackson
, who are also responsible for the brave and important "
New Jack City
," but who have not really made anything here other than a 1950s Pat Boone movie with blacks instead of whites.
That doesn\t make it a bad movie, and I imagine young audiences will enjoy the musical sequences and the glowing presence of Queen Latifah. But the first "House Party" movie raised expectations that this one disappoints.
"Note: The movie is rated R, for reasons I cannot guess at. Its perfectly suitable for teenagers."

The Boy Friend 1972 Cast
Twiggy as Polly
Christopher Gable as Tony
Max Adrian as Max
Bryan Pringle as Percy
Murray Melvin as Alphonse
Vladek Sheybal as Cecil B. De Thrill
137 minutes When the Chicago Film Festival held its evening with Busby Berkeley a few years ago, the effect of three straight hours of production numbers was, well, stupefying. Seen maybe three to a movie, Berkeley’s geometric arrangements of smiling girls were sort of fun. But when you got his entire career in one spliced-together dose, you couldn’t help realizing how little imagination he really had.
Berkeley liked to anchor his camera and give us sterile symmetrical variations on a theme. He got his effects with sheer excess: A hundred dames on a hundred grand pianos was outta sight, all right, but even in the 1930s there were alternatives. In movies like “
Swing Time
” and “
Top Hat
,” Astaire and Rogers were creating musicals that feel fresh today. They were supremely talented, of course, but that wasn’t their whole secret.
What they did with a series of directors and with Astaire usually having a creative hand in the choreography was to make musicals that were really movies, that weren’t stage bound, and that weren’t riveted to an anchored-down camera. In their movies, we somehow inhabited the same space with them, instead of being omnipotent observers positioned up in the rafters. We moved as they moved, and space unfolded logically.
All this helps us put a finger on the fundamental visual poverty of
Ken Russell
’s “The Boy Friend.” His musical is supposed to be a spoof on Berkeley-type 1930s musicals, of course, but after a while we realize that Russell belongs on Berkeley’s side. Even when he’s not deliberately doing Berkeley takeoffs, his camera is so joyless that it undermines every scene.
The idea is that a big Hollywood director is in a box at the edge of the stage, and everybody in the musical hopes to be hired for the movies. Russell allows this idea to dictate his camera placement; there are endless point-of-view shots from stage to box, and from box to stage, until we feel clobbered by them. His other three camera angles are 1 from the back of the stage looking out, 2 a full-front of the stage, and 3 the classic cliche shot showing the action from backstage.
These five camera angles almost literally dominate the visuals. Russell doesn’t seem to be having any fun. He doesn’t want to draw out the magic of the wonderful Sandy Wilson songs, or the inner life of his performers. As usual, he reveals himself as a woman-hater. It is bad enough that
Glenda Jackson
who is in most of his movies needs the attention of a good dentist; must Russell constantly attack her with a sadistic makeup artist?
Twiggy, the star of the show, emerges relatively undamaged. She is so passive, so wide-eyed, so innocent, so much a nothing, that Russell can’t really get at her the way he can with the sharp-edged Miss Jackson. Twiggy sings adequately and dances adequately, and she’s so . . . cute. She’s a pale little puppy, and a lot of the women in the audience seem to treasure her as they would a Hummel figurine titled “Malnutrition.”

My Piece of the Pie 2011 Cast
Gilles Lellouche as Steve
Karin Viard as France
Raphaele Godin as Melody
Lunis Sakji as Alban
Audrey Lamy as Josy
Written and directed by Cedric Klapisch
Comedy, Drama, Foreign Rated NR
109 minutes Writer-director
Cedric Klapisch
supplies a little of all five in "My Piece of Pie," a film about the everyday ways in which the markets deal in abstract numbers without the slightest interest in the lives that might be affected. In the French city of Dunkirk, a factory closes suddenly, families are uprooted, people lose their incomes and suddenly find themselves poor. In the most interesting element of the film, we see how a man seated before six computer screens in his Paris luxury apartment taps a key here and a key there and behaves as what
Tom Wolfe
immortalized as a Master of the Universe.
This man is Steve Delarue 
Gilles Lellouche
": 35, rich, single and a right proper bastard. Theres a sequence here in which he boldly picks up a model named Tessa Marine Vacth, flies her in his private plane to Venice and is shocked that she wont have sex with him because shed sort of prefer to, you know, like him first. WTF? Now hes heard everything."
The detailed savagery of his behavior indicates a man with no heart, no conscience and not even much common sense; Tessa tells him he will never be happy because he will never be able to love anyone but himself. Into his wretched life comes a pretty 40-ish woman named France 
Karin Viard
", a single mom who lost her job when he manipulated her factory out of existence. In Paris looking for work, she gets a job as Steves house cleaner, a task that expands to include managing his clueless life. She doesnt know or care who he is. But she is practical and copes, for example when Steves ex-wife, Melody "
Raphaele Godin
, dumps off their son, Alban 
Lunis Sakji
", without warning and announces shell be in Thailand for a month."
"Steve needs a nanny. He doesnt like children, doesnt understand them, hardly knows his 3½-year-old son. France takes over, bedding down on a futon next to the boy in Steves gym formerly “Albans room”, and they form a virtual family; she also doubles as his date at two social occasions, at which her brassy confidence stands out."
"The movie is best when showing us the lives of France and the odious Steve. It loses its way with Frances decision to pack up Alban and take him home with her to Dunkirk. She has well-meaning reasons for this trip, but to the world, it looks like a kidnapping, and theres nothing in her character, up until that point, that suggests shes remotely capable of such lunacy. The third act turns into an unlikely and contrived confrontation between Steve and unemployed workers."
"Movies make unwritten contracts with us. While its permitted for characters to reveal enormous surprises about themselves, I believe that by the last act, they should act more or less consistently in terms of the intelligence and judgment weve been led to expect of them. France unfortunately behaves entirely at the convenience of an unlikely plot turn. True, the movie sidesteps a couple of cliches it seems headed directly toward, but I might have preferred them to the preposterous melodrama it substitutes."

The Lost Man 1969 Cast
Sidney Poitier as Jason Higgs
Joanna Shimkus as Cathy Ellis
Al Freeman Jr. as Dennis
Michael Tolan as Hamilton
Leon Bibb as Eddie
Richard Dysart as Barnes
David Steinberg as Photographer
The first time we see
Sidney Poitier
in "The Lost Man," he is sitting impassively in the back seat of a car, wearing shades, watching a civil-rights demonstration, saying little. And even before the story develops, we understand that this is going to be a different Poitier role, perhaps a key role in the development of the Poitier image. And it is. Poitier is not precisely a bad guy, but he is a long way from the milksop if engaging, hero of "Lilies of the Field" or even of "In the Heat of the Night."
He is the representative of some unnamed organization, and his job is to mastermind a payroll robbery and supply the money to his invisible superiors. His plan is rather simple: He intends to use a civil-rights demonstration led by a moderate Al Freeman Jr. as a diversion while his gang pulls off the job.
But something goes wrong, and Poitier kills a cop. He is wounded, goes on the run, slides through the side streets of a city filled with police looking for him. He is befriended by a friendly black woman, and receives instructions from the organization to deliver the $200,000 loot.
First he tries a drop from a freight train - but there are too many cops around. Then, assisted by a white social worker 
Joanna Shimkus
 he enters on a final, thrilling police chase that leads down to the docks.
And we begin to realize that, for the last 45 minutes, the plot has been sounding familiar echoes. The credits list a novel by Frederick Laurence Green as the source. But, in fact, Robert Alan Aurthur seems to have drawn heavily from another source in his screenplay and direction: Carol Reed\s film "Odd Man Out" 1947, in which
James Mason
was an Irish rebel on the run from the British. Especially in the final sequences, and in the development of the Poitier character.
That would make it the second movie about black militants to be drawn from work about Irish militants. Not long ago we had Jules Dassin\s "
Up Tight
."
On balance, "The Lost Man" is the better film. It has the Poitier performance, for one thing, and Poitier has seldom been stronger or more human. He has just about obliterated the good-behavior conduct of "
"Guess Whos Coming to Dinner"
." Instead of a movie star, he seems much more inside his character.
Perhaps more importantly, "The Lost Man" is more convincing in its portrayal of desperate, committed black militants. There was something about the way scenes were staged in "Up Tight" that had you half-waiting for a musical number. But that is never a possibility as Poitier masterminds his robbery and tries to plan his escape. Still, no important feature film has ever quite captured the reality of "
American Revolution Two
" in portraying black militants.
There is a lingering loss to "The Lost Man," a tendency to smooth corners and tinker with the plot. Can we really believe, for example, that social worker Joanne Shimkus would be a sort of den mother or lover for a militant cell? Or that the opposed ideologies of nonviolence and radical militancy would come together quite so easily as they do when Poitier and Freeman talk?
"The Lost Man" presents a villain we could get to like, which is perhaps the idea in any movie featuring the No. 1 box-office star.

The Green Wall 1972 Cast
Julio Aleman as Mario
Sandra Rive as Delba
Raul Martin as Romulo
Jorie Montoro as Chief of Jungle Region
Crime, Foreign, Horror, Thriller 103 minutes
It is so rare to find a movie that people reach out to and embrace, a movie that makes you feel cleaner and more alive. "The Green Wall" is a movie like that. It came to the 1970 Chicago Film Festival with little advance publicity all we knew was that it was the fourth feature ever made in Peru. But the Chicago critics fell in love with it at a preview, and their advance reviews helped inspire a sold-out house for its festival screening.
When it was over, the audience rose in a joyous standing ovation Its director, a big bear of a man named Armando Robles Godoy, stood there grinning through his shaggy moustache, and there were tears in his eyes. There was a feeling in the theater that we had been present when a great movie came into the world.
"The Green Wall" is inspired, to some degree, by Robles Godoy\s own life experience. It is about an office worker who sickens of the big-city chaos of Lima and enlists himself and his family in a government program to colonize the forest. He is given a large tract of land in the wilderness, clears the rich soil and grows coffee. He builds a simple, comfortable bamboo home for his wife and his small boy, and it has a cool veranda that overlooks a little stream.
The boy loves the trickle of water, and builds his own tiny city there out of blocks and pieces of tin and glass and string. There is a waterwheel that goes around and around and tinkles against a glass jar. Its music is part of the soft murmur of the forest: the bird cries, the leaves brushing against each other, the calls and coughs of the animals.
In these days of a movement away from the urban clutter and back to a more natural life, "The Green Wall" is a poem about the life a lot of us would like to lead. It isn\t in any sense an adventure saga about survival in the jungle; these are intelligent, self-sufficient pioneers who understand the land and love it. What frustrates them is not the challenge of colonization, but the stupid government bureaucracy that runs the settlement program.
The movie opens with one of the most beautiful evocations of love I can remember in a film. The man and his wife make love tenderly and with deep affection, and their little son, who is supposed to be napping, watches them with clear-eyed contentment; because they love each other, he feels good. He is a quiet child because he has no friends to play with, but the world of his imagination is a busy place and we are allowed into it.
"Then an accident happens; the boy is bitten by a snake. The father goes by boat and Jeep into the nearest town to get serum - but the serum is locked up, and the bureaucrat with the key is at a political rally in the next town. As the father races desperately to save his own sons life, Robles Godoy gives us a bitter commentary on the ways bureaucracy frustrates humanity. And then the film closes with a procession of boats on the river, simple and stately and filled with an enormous dignity; and a weary embrace between the man and his wife that says whatever a movie can say about the deepness of love."
"The Green Wall" is beautiful in so many different ways - in its story, its photography, in the construction of its images - that it becomes not simply a movie but an affirmation of life. There is not a false note in it, nothing that lies or is trickery, and we\re reminded of "
The Bicycle Thief
" and "
The Wild Child
."
And then we wonder...how could this movie come from Peru, with its "undeveloped" movie industry? The answer, of course, is that great films have nothing to do with the industry. They come from great filmmakers, who might be found in Peru as well as anywhere. The Chicago Film Festival honored "The Green Wall" with its Golden Hugo and its special Critics\ Prize, and that helped Robles Godoy with his entry into the cutthroat American movie market. Now "The Green Wall" is back with us, and that is a very good thing.

Spring Break 1983 Cast
David Knell as Nelson
Perry Lang as Adam
Paul Land as Stu
Steve Bassett as O.T.
Corinne Alphen as Joan
Produced and directed by Sean S. Cunningham
Screenplay by David Smilow
Photographed by Stephen Poster
Edited by Susan Cunningham
Comedy, Romance Rated R
102 minutes "Styles in exploitation films have a way of changing overnight. Just when I thought I couldnt take one single more Dead Teenager Movie -- one more of those hundreds of movies in which screaming teenagers were chased by maniacs and carved up with hatchets -- they stopped making them. Thats the good news. The bad news is, Dead Teenager Movies have been replaced by Horny Teenager Movies."
The first one was "
"Porkys"
." It went through the roof at the box office. Then we got "The Last American Virgin," "Private Lessons," "Going All the Way" and "My Tutor" which was sort of fun. Now here\s "Spring Break," a sex-and-sand epic about the annual mating rituals in Fort Lauderdale.
The obvious inspiration for "Spring Break" is all the Beach Party movies from the late 1950s and early 1960s. Here\s the most obvious connection between "Spring Break" and the Beach Party flicks: They all have absolutely unnecessary subplots involving idiotic politicians who act like complete nerds and become apoplectic at the thought of kids having any fun.
"In the late 1950s, that sort of plot was standard. This is 1983, and its absurd. The story this time involves a cloddish senatorial candidate Donald Symington who becomes enraged when his son sneaks off to join the gang at Fort Lauderdale. He assigns a bunch of hired goons to patrol the beach and bring back his son."
There\s another thing seriously wrong with "Spring Break." It doesn\t know that girls are people, too. It\s only about horny teenage boys. Four of them -- two studs, two timid kids -- become roommates in a motel and go out looking for where the girls are. All four have names, identities, characteristics, etc. The whole movie involves their adventures, their quests for girls, their exploits, their big wins in the belly-flopping contest, etc. The women in their lives are interchangeable, and, as nearly as I can recall, not one woman in this movie was called by name!
That\s too bad, especially since "Spring Break" co-stars a young woman named
Corinne Alphen
", who is described as Penthouses 1982 Pet of the Year. Sad to say, most of the Pets and Playmates who win movie roles turn out to be sort of self-conscious and untalented as actresses. Not Corinne Alphen. She has a dazzling smile, a great personality and a relaxed naturalness on the screen that makes the Horny Teenage Boys seem all the more gauche."
A funny little movie might have been made about her adventures in Fort Lauderdale, "where the boys are." She would have had the personality to carry it. Instead, the lockstep mentalities who made this movie tell their story entirely from a boring male point of view, supply us with male wimps and studs who are equally uninteresting, and view women only as wet T-shirt finalists. What a letdown for horny movie critics.

Trouble the Water 2008 Directed by
Carl Deal Tia Lessin
With footage by Kimberly Roberts
Documentary Rated NR
93 minutes Do you know what it means? To miss New Orleans?
-- song lyrics
As I write, the hellstorm Ike is battering Texas. I hear of evacuation buses, National Guard troops, emergency supplies, contraflow, Red Cross volunteers, helicopter rescues. It is a different world from the world after Katrina hit New Orleans. Yes, there were noble rescue efforts, but too little and too late, and without enough urgency on the part of the federal "You\re doin\ a great job, Brownie!" government.
If you could have witnessed Katrina at Ground Zero, your blood would have boiled at the treatment of U.S. citizens. The extraordinary documentary "Trouble the Water" had an eyewitness in the city\s 9th Ward,
during
the hurricane. Her name was
Kimberly Roberts
. She was 24. A few days earlier, she had purchased a video camera from a street hustler for $20 a week. She used it to film the experiences of her family before, during and after the storm.
Her footage is surrounded by professionally filmed material that deepens and explains what happened. But the eyewitness footage has a desperate urgency that surpasses any other news and doc footage I have seen. Using lessons learned from TV news, she interviews her family, friends and neighbors, does voiceovers while making shots, even signs off with her stage name as a rapper: "This is Black Kold Madina from the 9th Ward."
We see the prologue to the storm. Residents have been urged to evacuate, but many do not have the means or the ways to get to evacuation centers, buses or trains. If they have cars, they don\t have gas money. They hunker down and hope to live through it. Kimberly warns a homeless man: "You better take care of yoself or the storm gonna
whup
yo ass!"
Drops of rain start to fall. They watch the TV news. Katrina worsens. Power goes out. The levee near their house is breached. Waters rise. They take refuge in their attic, in pitch darkness. We hear their call to 911. They have women and children up there, even a baby. They\re trapped. They\re told no rescue teams are working "at this time" -- or not for days, in their neighborhood. They escape, helped by a muscular Good Samaritan who found a boat drifting past. Eventually they retreat to shelter in Alexandria, La., where the makers of this film,
Carl Deal
and
Tia Lessin
, found them and her footage. Her film changed all their plans for theirs.
The documentary shows outrageous behavior, none more so than when they and many others are directed to a nearby Navy base for refuge. The base is being closed. It has an empty housing unit in plain view with hundreds of beds. The gates are locked. They are turned away at gunpoint by sailors with M-16s.
"Roberts needs more practice at holding the camera steady and framing shots. It doesnt matter. We feel her footage at the base of our spines. Sometimes she says nothing, just points the camera, and the images speak for themselves. Carl Deal and Tia Lessin, who have worked with"
Michael Moore
, augment her eyewitness account with footage from TV news showing New Orleans Mayor Ray Nagin, Louisiana Gov. Kathleen Blanco, and shots of the breached levees and the panorama of destruction.
The film is about Katrina, and even more about the human spirit. Kimberly and her husband, Scott, are the life force personified: smart, funny, undefeated, indignant, determined. Kimberly sings three songs on the soundtrack. We see her performing one of them. That scene reportedly won a standing ovation at Sundance 2008, where the film won the Grand Jury Prize as best documentary.
Charges were made after Katrina that the federal response was lacking because so many of the victims were poor and black. "We feel like we\re not U.S. citizens," Kimberly says at one point. At another, she rails against George Bush in language I will spare you. One of the most affecting scenes comes when Kimberly, Scott and their dog wander down the streets of their neighborhood, remembering: "There was an old lady living in that house. Always on her porch, saying hello to everybody." Her good cheer disappears when she learns that the man she warned was killed. The storm whupped his ass. That was his own fault. What happened to the residents of the 9th Ward was not their fault.
Roberts was pregnant when she and Scott went to the Sundance premiere. On Monday, Jan. 21, at the Park City hospital, she gave birth. It was Martin Luther King Jr. Day.
Note:
Tia Lessin will appear after the 5 and 7:30 p.m. shows and before the 10 p.m. screening tonight at Landmark Century. On Saturday, Carl Deal will join her after the 5 and 7:30 p.m. shows and before the 10 p.m. screening at Landmark Century.

Night Of The Living Dead 1990 Cast
Tony Todd as Ben
Patricia Tallman as Barbara
Tom Towles as Harry
McKee Anderson as Helen
William Butler as Tom
Rose Katie Finneran as Judy
Directed by Tom Savini
Produced by John A. Russo
Russ Streiner Written by
George A. Romero Romero
Photographed by Frank Prinzi
Edited by Tom Dubensky
Music by Paul McCollough
Horror Rated R
96 minutes In 1968
George Romero
made a scruffy little low-budget horror film named "
Night of the Living Dead
," and it was truly frightening. That was in the days before the MPAA rating system, and I saw it at a Saturday matinee filled with little kids, who were so scared they were screaming and weeping. I noted their reaction in my review - I believed, then and now, that some films are simply not appropriate for children - but at the same time I had to admire the artistry of Romero\s film. With grainy black and white photography, a handful of locations and a cast of unknowns, he created a horrifyingly original vision that has been ripped off ever since - not least by Romero himself.
The "living dead" in the movie were zombies who lurched about the landscape, their bodies decaying, their eyes blank, attempting to feed on human flesh. They had been dead, but their motor impulses and animal needs had somehow brought them back to a sickening parody of life, and now the only way to kill them was to destroy their brains.
In the original film, the zombies presided over a long night of terror, attacking seven normal people barricaded inside a farmhouse.
The creatures attacked again in Romero\s "
Dawn of the Dead
" 1979, which was a superb horror film, and in his "
Day of the Dead
" 1985, which was not. Now they are back in a remake of the original film, which has been written by Romero but directed by
Tom Savini
, his longtime makeup expert. The remake is so close to the original that there is no reason to see both, unless you want to prove to yourself that black and white photography is indeed more effective than color for this material.
The film once again has a band of people barricaded in a farmhouse. They desperately and endlessly nail boards, doorways and tabletops across the windows; people spend more time hammering in this movie than doing anything else. The heroine 
Patricia Tallman
 is soon joined by the hero 
Tony Todd
, and then by a frightened young couple 
William Butler
"and Katie Finneran. Eventually its revealed that three more people are hiding in the cellar - a deranged husband "
Tom Towles
, his wife 
McKee Anderson
, and their unconscious daughter, who has been bitten by zombies.
The discovery of the people in the basement leads to the movie\s longest-running non-event, a bitter fight between Towles and the others about whether they should all hide out in the basement, or stay upstairs. Todd says no to the basement. Towles says yes, frothing at the mouth. They scream at each other in confrontations in which the overacting is so ludicrous, it gets bad laughs. Towles is an actor who can indeed be chilling; he is unforgettable playing Otis, the mass murderer\s slack jawed friend, in "
Henry: Portrait of a Serial Killer
." But here, like all of the other actors, he is wasted on a film that confuses screaming with emotion.
Thanks for small gifts: I am grateful that Tallman\s character eventually figures out something that has been abundantly obvious ever since the first "Living Dead" movie. The zombies are very stupid, and very slow. "You could just walk right past them!" she observes, looking out of the farmhouse. And so she does, for a while, until she is intercepted by a band of redneck hunters who are killing zombies for sport. The ending of the movie, with its bonfire and tortured freeze-frame scenes, is apparently intended to suggest that we really are no better than the zombies, a conclusion which, even based on the evidence of the characters in this movie, I have trouble in accepting.

Bully 2012 Directed by
Lee Hirsch Written by
Hirsh Cynthia Lowen
Documentary, Drama Rated PG-13
for intense thematic material, disturbing content and some strong language, all involving kids 92 minutes
"Theres only one bully actually identified in the film. A clueless teacher has pulled together two kids who got in a fight and insists they shake hands. One kid is as friendly as an insurance salesman and sticks out his paw with a friendly smile."
"The other kid refuses. The teacher sends the friendly kid away and lectures the other one. Of course its the “nice kid” who is the bully. He probably gets away with more stuff than a con man. His victim knows it. Hes been down this path before."
"If the teacher were more clued in, shed know it, too. One of the themes in Lee Hirschs documentary is how many parents and teachers have no idea whats really happening in the secret society of children in their care. Many bullied children are reluctant to tell anyone whats happening to them. Are they embarrassed or scared? Bullying is designed to make them feel inferior, and in their cases, perhaps it has worked."
"The film follows the stories of several children in Mississippi, Oklahoma and Georgia. Two of them committed suicide. Their lives had become unendurable without anyone noticing, or taking their situations seriously enough. I can believe it. The most infuriating people in the film are teachers or administrators who dont know whats happening — or dont want to know, perhaps afraid of bureaucratic difficulties or angry parents. I imagine, but dont know, that the parents of bullies are likely to flare up in anger at accusations against their children — and then possibly abuse their kid themselves later. Do bullies have nice parents?"
Sometimes an entire community gets in on the act. A girl who is a lesbian is humiliated by a teacher in front of other students, and her parents observe that many of their own longtime friends have become hostile. A culture of ignorance and homophobia feeds this.
"Much has been made of how the MPAA gave this film an R rating for its language. A PG-13 has belatedly been handed out to a version with some swear words taken out. It was widely reported that the MPAA was preventing admission to those very kids under 17 who could benefit from it the most. That part Im not so sure about. The movie contains little solid information about bullying, and although we feel sorry for the victims who are profiled, it is unclear what can be learned from observing them."
"My notion is that a fiction film might be more effective than a documentary. It could encourage young viewers to identify with victims of bullying and to dislike bullies. Movies that encourage empathy are more effective than those that objectify problems. Some kids will think: “Im not like those losers.” The right kind of fictional story might make that harder to do."
"Why are some people bullied? Because they are different. How? It doesnt matter. A bully can act as the catalyst for encouraging a group to draw together in cruelty against someone perceived as not a member. This process was shown with great power in Larry Clarks “"
Bully
” 2001, which added an unexpected twist: A brutal bully is actually murdered by a group of his victims, who together are moved to do something none of them could ever do alone.
"“Bully” is a sincere documentary but not a great one. We feel sympathy for the victims, and their parents or friends, but the film helplessly seems to treat bullying as a problem without a solution. I can think of one thing that might help. Parents and schools should place great emphasis on the idea that it is all right to be different. Racism and all the other “isms” grow from primitive tribalism, the instinctive hostility against those of another tribe, race, religion, nationality, class or whatever. You are a lucky child if your parents taught you to accept diversity. Teaching prejudice to a child is itself a form of bullying. Youve got to be taught to hate."

Patang 2012 Cast
Mukund Shukla as Jayesh
Sugandha Garg as Priya
Aakash Maherya as Bobby
Seema Biswas as Sudha
Pannaben Soni as Ba
Directed by Prashant Bhargava
Written by James Townsend
Bhargava Rated NR
"Patang" plunges head-first into a family based in Ahmedabad, where India\s largest annual kite festival is celebrated. It reflects the way Indians live in one another\s pockets. Homes and businesses, temples and roadways, are all crowded close together, neighbors know one another, and it\s all held together by a network of the world\s most baffling traffic.
"This film is joyous, but more than that: Its lovely in its construction. The director,"
Prashant Bhargava
, born and raised on Chicago\s South Side, knows what his basic story line is, but reveals it subtly. The story in outline would be simple enough for a made-for-TV movie. But there is nothing simple about "Patang."
An affluent uncle from Delhi named Jayesh 
Mukund Shukla
 pays a much-delayed visit back home to his family in Ahmedabad, bringing along his daughter, Priya 
Sugandha Garg
", who hasnt seen these relatives in years. He meets his mother Ba "
Pannaben Soni
, sister-in-law 
Seema Biswas
 and his nephew — the son of his brother, who died of a heart attack. The nephew, Chakku Nawazuddin Siddiqui, resents the way this distant man descends grandly on his relatives and feels he has the right to make suggestions and changes.
The story line becomes fully clear only toward the end. In form, "Patang" looks almost like a cinema-verite documentary of this family, surrounded by the city and the kite festival. Many key shots were obtained during the festival itself, and we see the skies over the city filled with thousands of dancing, dueling kites, as every single rooftop is occupied by people. Below in the streets, bands, fireworks and food vendors create a tumult.
There is a little romantic subplot, involving the daughter from Delhi and Bobby 
Aakash Maherya
, who begin a flirtation on the rooftop and continue it during a motorbike ride. On a bridge, Priya and Bobby begin a flirtation. Her eyes dance with merriness. They\ve been together a few hours. In a lesser film, this would be a love story with a happy ending. "But Bobby," she says, "we hardly know each other. Do you expect me to leave behind thousands of friends in Delhi?"
"He does. Their flirtatious conversation is filmed in close-ups and closer-ups. The effect is intimate and sensual. In one shot only, cigarette smoke coils from her mouth. We never otherwise see her smoking. This establishes in a moment that she is more worldly than the boy. She kisses him, but that will be that: This is only a few days visit."
The family house itself is a character, and there are a few extended shots of its graceful, playful architecture and happy colors. Many interiors involve a photograph of the dead brother, whose soul seems to inhabit it. Meals are prepared and shared on a table in the street. The food looks delicious; fingers are often used. People are teased to perform songs. Gossip and chatter run wild. We are immersed in the life and sort it out for ourselves. The effect is curiously like being invited into this home and learning while we stay.
Prashant Bhargava went to grade school and the Kenwood Academy in Chicago. How did his background produce such a lovely and successful indie film in India? He told me, "The seeds for the movie were based on the memories of my uncles\ dueling kites," he said. "In India, kite flying transcends boundaries. Rich or poor, Hindu or Muslim, young or old — together they look toward the sky with wonder, thoughts and doubts forgotten. Kite flying is meditation in its simplest form.
"In 2005, I visited Ahmedabad to experience their annual kite festival, the largest in India. When I first witnessed the entire city on their rooftops, staring up at the sky, their kites dueling ferociously, dancing without inhibition, I knew I had to make this film in Ahmedabad."
"And thats what happened. His film took three years of research, was seven years in the making, stars mostly non-actors and the cast improvised its takes based on the script. It flies as free and colorfully as a kite."

A Dangerous Woman 1993 Cast
Debra Winger as Martha
Barbara Hershey as Frances
Gabriel Byrne as MacKey
David Strathairn as Getso
Directed by Stephen Gyllenhaal
Drama, Romance Rated R
For Some Graphic Sexuality, Strong Language and A Scene Of Violence 99 minutes
Observe the way
Debra Winger
plays her character in "A Dangerous Woman," and you will learn something about the alchemy of acting. She doesn\t look particularly different in this film - aside, of course, from the details of makeup or hair style that help women express their beauty. You can always see that it\s Debra Winger. But she projects such a different essence in the film, so profoundly different, that you wonder how she\s doing it.
She plays a woman named Martha, who is slow, or somewhat retarded, or whatever word you want to use. She can function in the world, and even hold a job at the dry cleaners, but she is odd in her behavior, and children in the street feel safe to follow and mock her. Her home is the guest cottage next to the big house occupied by a close relative, Frances 
Barbara Hershey
, who has sort of inherited Martha as a responsibility.
"Winger must have studied women like Martha in preparing for her performance. She must have lived beside them, observing a hundred different details. She puts them all together into a portrayal that never seems made up of those details, however; everything is of a piece, and after a time we are simply watching Martha, identifying with her. Look at the way Martha studies the movements in the faces of people shes talking to. She all but peers at them, looking for clues, trying to read emotions and meanings. Look at the way she walks, filled with purpose, concerned with getting from here to there without false effort. Look at the way she stiffens when she is treated unfairly. Look at how proudly she insists that she always tells the truth."
"The women live in a small town where everybody knows each other, more or less. Frances is a bit player in local politics, and it gradually becomes clear that shes the victim of a series of affairs, that she tries to find herself through the assistance of men, and usually fails. As for Martha, she hardly seems aware there is such a thing as a sex life. Then one day an alcoholic handyman named Mackey "
Gabriel Byrne
" comes drifting into their lives, looking for work. It so happens that Frances frame porch has been caved in by an automobile driven by a jealous wife who thought, correctly, that her husband was inside the house. Frances sends the handyman away, but Mackey comes back anyway, and starts the job; he needs the work so badly he has no choice."
"Eventually Mackey will become involved with both women. But it is not as simple as it might sound, because he isnt bad - none of these people are bad - and in the loneliness and desperation of these lives many things can happen. His moral carelessness is fueled by alcoholism, which he acknowledges, although the movie in general doesnt take it very seriously."
"Mackeys involvement sets a plot into motion, a plot that eventually involves another local man, Getso "
David Strathairn
" a worthless petty thief at the dry cleaners. Things happen. The movie is not really about the things that happen - its about the two women - but its as if the screenplay gets seized by a desire to tell the superficial story, and forgets to tell the real one. There is a pregnancy and a killing and a secret that cannot be shared, and its all really just melodrama."
I guess human stories have to be linked up to the mechanics of a plot in order to get financed, or to find an audience. No one would have wanted to see a movie that simply watched and listened with sympathy to the events in the daily life of a moderately retarded woman. But why is it that violence has to be involved? Why do so many plots depend on violence as the shortcut for creating dramatic tension. What do Martha and her job and her simple hopes have to do with all these distraught scenes in the police station, and all that blood? Look at another current movie, "
Ruby in Paradise
," which by setting itself free from the contrivances of sensational plotting allows itself to be deep and true.
"A Dangerous Woman" raises more questions than it answers.
The handyman character is well-played by Byrne, and surprisingly sympathetic, considering he sometimes behaves in an unprincipled way.
"But he functions too much as an invention of the plot, dropped into the story to busily make speeches and love. He doesnt have much to do with the real lives of the two women. Then there is another character handled carelessly: the wife of Frances politician lover, who drove her car into the porch. This woman reappears in the movie at an important juncture and takes her husband back, and its all handled in long shots, without explanation, so that we can see shes just a convenience for the screenwriter."
The movies are so seldom perfect that it\s enough to find something perfect in them. What\s nearly perfect in "A Dangerous Woman" is the Debra Winger performance. Her Martha seems to float above the inventions of the plot, in a world of her own. She may not know everything, but she knows what she knows, and acts on it to the best of her ability. She does not lie. She will not hurt another. She deserves her chance at happiness, and she knows it. It\s quite a performance.

Old Joy 2006 Cast
Will Oldham as Kurt
Daniel London as Mark
Tanya Smith as Tanya
Directed by Kelly Reichart
Written by Reichart
Jonathan Raymond Based on a short story by
Raymond Drama, Indie
Rated NR 73 minutes
A rainy afternoon in a fern-carpeted Cascade forest. A black slug slides across a boulder cusioned with brilliant green moss. Why do I think I\ll remember that moment from Kelly Reichart\s "Old Joy" for a long, long time? It doesn\t have anything to do with furthering the story, about two old friends who haven\t seen each other for a while and take an overnight trip to a hot springs in the mountains near Portland, Oregon. It\s just...
right
. The right image in the right place at the right time. Necessary. Essential.
Like a great jazz musician, Reichart understands that striking a single, well-placed note can resonate more profoundly than playing a splashy cascade of noise just because you can. "Old Joy" resounds with sustained images and sounds that are given the time and space to reverberate -- fitting for a movie that begins with the chirp of a bird perched on a gutter and the chime of a meditation gong.
"Its based on a short story and feels very much like that atmospheric, economical form of storytelling that comes down to this: The two friends, Mark "
Daniel London
 and Kurt 
Will Oldham
, drive up into the mountains and get lost trying to find the hot springs. They pitch camp at a spot littered with abandoned furniture and spend the evening drinking beer around a fire and shooting at the cans with a pellet gun. The next day, they find the springs. After soaking in them for a while, they drive back to Portland.
The End.
Of course, that is no more an accurate description of "Old Joy" than saying James Joyce\s
The Dead
"is about some Irish people who go to a party and then go home; meanwhile, it snows. Its not only that innumerable incidents are left out of this outline, but that what"
happens
in the story isn\t defined by incident. In that sense, I couldn\t synopsize what happens in "Old Joy" any more than I could tell you what happens in "
The Dead
," or Yasujiro Ozu\s "
Late Spring
", or Miles Davis\ "In a Silent Way."
Everything
"happens. But, as they say about jazz, its as much about the notes you dont play but hear nevertheless as the ones you do. And sometimes the greatest drama can take place between the lines, or outside the province of the frame, and all we notice is a pause or a glance. Or a shot of a slug moving across some moss."
Some may think of it as "leisurely" or "slow-paced," but those but those qualities contribute to the almost unbearable suspensefulness of "Old Joy." There are unarticulated tensions, feelings of sorrow, unease and even dread that course through the movie like a hidden creek. And when Mark and Kurt finally locate the turn-off to the springs, we see the sky reflected in their windshield and the
whole world turns
on this moment. What is about to happen? Will we recognize it when it does? Or did it already happen? What did it mean? "Old Joy" is not going to offer up its secrets -- mysteries of the human heart and mind -- in a glib or facile manner. All you have to do is watch, and feel, and think.
"Kurt obviously yearns to reconnect with Mark, and with the past, in some way, and hes saddened and frustrated that he cant. Mark, who drives around listening to Air America as if it were the one thin remaining tether to a larger dynamic world of politics and idealism that he used to believe in, seems perpetually numb. Part of its political -- living in a blue state in every sense, depressed into a condition of learned helplessness by elections and events, while the impotent callers on the radio drone about the possibility of a third party and bemoan the nonexistence of a second party. But perhaps the third party weighing most heavily on Marks mind is the one in the belly of his wife, Tanya. Hes about to become a father."
"Kurt and its OK to make the connection to another young blond man named Kurt from the Pacific Northwest thinks of himself as a spiritual seeker, but that may be because he still smokes way more dope than any of his old friends, most of whom hes lost contact with. In one of the movies best sly jokes -- and most telling bits of characterization -- he slips on a pair of plum-colored shorts, and his purplish wardrobe looks like cast-offs from the early-1980s Oregon ashram of the Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh, followers of whom, Pacific Northwesterners recall, always dressed in those colors favored by their guru, who was deported from the United States for immigration fraud."
The way Kurt spins his stories, he\s always going off on wilderness enlightenment retreats, and has just returned from Ashland, which he says was "amazing. Tranformative. I\m at a whole new place now, really." Both Kurt and Mark behave as if they\d had this same conversation a million times before. Kurt is a flake -- the kind of guy who sleeps on friends\ couches well into his 30s or 40s -- but he\s also troubled by his inability to adapt to adulthood.
What does Kurt
want
from Mark? Is it lost brotherhood, agape; or is there a sexual component, or does he just wish Mark could give him back the old days, and old joys, of their younger selves? Those questions, which linger long after the movie is over, make "Old Joy" unshakable.

State of Grace 1990 Cast
Sean Penn as Terry
Ed Harris as Frankie
Gary Oldman as Jackie
Robin Wright as Kathleen
John Turturro as Nick
Burgess Meredith as Finn
Directed by Phil Joanou
Produced by Ned Dowd
Randy Ostrow Ron Rotholz
Written by Dennis McIntyre
Photographed by Jordan Cronenweth
Edited by Claire Simpson
Music by Ennio Morricone
Action, Crime, Drama, Thriller Rated R
134 minutes "State of Grace" is not quite sure which is worse - murder, or yuppies moving into the neighborhood. That\s one of its charms. The movie is so sincere and confused in its values that it mirrors the goofy loyalties and violent pathology of its characters. They\re low-level Irish-American gangsters who operate in the Hell\s Kitchen area of New York City, west of Times Square, and one measure of their success as gangsters is the fact that rising rents are forcing them out of the neighborhood.
The movie opens with a reunion. Terry 
Sean Penn
", who used to live in the neighborhood, has been on the road for a few years. Now hes back in town, and embracing his best friend Jackie "
Gary Oldman
 in one of the sleazy saloons where gangsters and winos seem to be the only customers.
"Crime in this neighborhood is a family affair. The Irish gang is led by Jackies older brother, Frankie "
Ed Harris
, who has moved to the suburbs and calls the shots from his middle-class house on a tree-lined street, far from the drug deals that pay his mortgage. The two brothers have a sister named Kathleen 
Robin Wright
, who has also tried to get out of the neighborhood - she works as a clerk in an uptown hotel. But she and Terry used to be in love, and so of course Fate is going to have a hand in what happens next.
Since a great deal of what happens in "State of Grace" depends on an important secret that it not revealed until the second half of the movie, I will have to tread gingerly around some of the details.
"But the most interesting aspect of the movie is right up front: the confused notion by Jackie that he is, in some way, protecting the neighborhood by committing crimes there. Although the gangs main business seems to be selling drugs, Frankie is willing to pull some jobs simply as a civic service. For example, he takes Terry along one night when he burns down a construction office on a site that will soon be a yuppie apartment building."
Frankie is probably crazy, or maybe his mind has been completely addled by the drugs and booze he has channeled through it.
His idea of making arson into fun is to pour the gasoline between himself and the door, and then see if he can run through it without killing himself. He also likes to hold target practice up on the roof.
"And he is capable of shocking, cold-blooded killing, as he shows in one of the movies most surprising scenes, a reconciliation with the Mafia that has an unexpected ending."
"Gary Oldmans performance in the movie is the best thing about it. Sean Penn is just as good an actor, but he has the lead, and theres not as much he can do with it. He has to be sane and tortured and conflicted, and battle with his opposing emotions. All standard screenplay stuff. Oldmans character is more pure. He acts only on the basis of his instincts and prejudices, or out of vengeance and fear. His character doesnt have to do the fancy footwork."
"There are moments in the film that are absolutely chilling - as when Ed Harris, who wanted to be at arms length from the crimes committed for his profit - finds that he has to personally kill someone he loves. But the movies plot paradoxically gets less and less original, the more complicated it becomes. At the outset, when it seems concerned only with the behavior of its characters, its original and challenging. Then it turns into a story filled with familiar elements, and by the end everything is happening by the numbers."
There\s another problem. This movie, intended as a gritty slice-of-life about gangsters in New York City, is being released at about the same time as Martin Scorsese\s "
GoodFellas
," which deals with the same subject and is a film so strong and graceful that few others can stand comparison to it. What\s best about "State of Grace" is what\s unique to it - the twisted vision of the Oldman character, who lives in a world of evil and betrayal and has somehow thought himself around to the notion that he is doing the right thing.

Rize 2005 Written and directed by
David LaChapelle Documentary, Musical
Rated PG-13 for suggestive content, drug references, language and brief nudity
86 minutes The footage in this movie has not been speeded up in any way. We need to be told that, right at the beginning of "Rize," because krumping, the dance style shown in the movie, looks like life in fast-forward. You haven\t heard of krumping? Neither had I. And I didn\t know dressing up like a clown has become an alternative to joining a street gang in the South Central and Watts areas of Los Angeles. When this movie was made, there were more than 50 clown groups; now there are said to be more than 100.
"Rize" is the rare documentary that plays as breaking news. Krump and clowning have become so big in L.A. that the fifth annual krumping competition, known as Battle Zone, was held in the Great Western Forum. Yet until this movie was made by Vanity Fair photographer
David LaChapelle
", it was a phenomenon that existed below the radar of the media. Its an alternative to the hip-hop style that is growing a little old; because recording labels and cable TV have so much invested in hip-hop, however, they have been slow to embrace krump. Or maybe they just couldnt believe their eyes."
"The clowns in these groups are real clowns. Bozo should get royalties. They have rainbow wigs and putty noses and weirdly made-up faces and wildly colored costumes, and they would have floppy shoes except then they couldnt dance. The dance they do, krumping, sometimes looks like a fistfight in fast motion, sometimes borrows moves from strippers, sometimes looks like speeded-up martial arts, sometimes is beyond description. Borrowing a page from poetry jams, krumpers face off one-on-one and try to out-krump one another, and the final showdown in Battle Zone V is between the two main factions of the movement, the Krumps and the Clowns. Just to spell out the difference: While Clowns krump, not all Krumps are Clowns. Krumping was invented by Lil C, Tight Eyez and Dragon after they left Tommy to start their own school. So now you know."
This world is the invention, we learn, of Tommy the Clown Tom Johnson, who as a young man was into drugs and gangs. "Living like that," he says, "you either wind up shot dead or in jail. I was lucky. I wound up in jail." When he was released and unsure what direction his life would take, he was asked to play a clown at a friend\s birthday party. He liked the way people responded to him as a clown; they regarded him as if he had dropped out of ordinary categories and lived in a separate world.
Tommy the Clown became "a ghetto celebrity," he tells us, and we see footage of Tommy making unannounced appearances at shopping malls, movie theater lines and street corners. He takes his first disciple, Lil Tommy "When my mom was in jail, he took me in", and soon he\s running a Clown Academy. A key moment comes when the clowns evoke a new kind of dancing; a clown named Larry is a key innovator. Soon there are groups of krump-dancing clowns all over the streets of neighborhoods that were once afire the film opens with footage from the Watts and Rodney King rioting.
In these neighborhoods, to wear the wrong gang colors in the wrong place at the wrong time is to risk being shot dead. But a clown wears every possible color at once and in a way becomes disqualified. "The gangs sort of leave us alone," one of the clowns says, and there is a sense that joining a clown group may be a way to survive outside the gang culture. It is also a very weird lifestyle.
"We see clowns devising elaborate facial makeup, owing more to Batman villains than to Bozo. We witness artistic rivalries between various styles of clowning and dancing. And there are suggestions that not everyone loves clowns; while Tommy is running the faceoff at the Forum, his home is trashed. Late in the film, one of the most lovable characters is shot dead by drive-by killers, firing at random. Guns dont kill people; people with guns kill people."
Still, "Rize" on the whole brings good news, of a radical social innovation that simultaneously sidesteps street gangs and bypasses hip-hop. Krumping should turn up any day now on BET and MTV, if it hasn\t already; whether the dancers will be dressed as clowns is less likely. There is something a little eerie about clowns, and to see dozens of them at once perhaps inspires even gang members to go elsewhere.
The most remarkable thing about "Rize" is that it is real. I remember hearing vaguely at Sundance about an earlier short subject that LaChapelle made about this phenomenon; was it on the level or a mockumentary? If "Rize" were a fake doc, it would look about the same as it does now, and would be easier to absorb, since the idea of gangs of clowns sounds like a put-on. But it isn\t.

The Lovers On The Bridge 1999 Cast
Juliette Binoche as Michele Stalens
Denis Lavant as Alex
Klaus-Michael Gruber as Hans
Written and Directed by Leos Carax
Drama, Foreign, Romance Rated NR
For Adults, Mild Sex and Language 125 minutes
Leos Carax\s "The Lovers on the Bridge" arrives trailing clouds of faded glory. It was already one of the most infamous productions in French history when it premiered at Cannes in 1992, where some were stunned by its greatness and more were simply stunned. Its American release was delayed, according to Carax, because its distributor vindictively jacked up the film\s asking price. Now it has arrived at last, a film both glorious and goofy, inspiring affection and exasperation in nearly equal measure.
The story could have been told in a silent melodrama, or on the other half of a double bill with Jean Vigo\s great "
"LAtalante"
" 1934, which was Carax\s inspiration. Carax\s film begins on the ancient Pont-Neuf, the oldest bridge in Paris, where two vagrants discover each other. One is Michele 
Juliette Binoche
, an artist who is going blind. The other is Alex 
Denis Lavant
, a drunk and druggie who supports himself by fire-breathing. The bridge has been closed for a year for repairs, bags of cement and paving blocks are tossed about, and they make it their home for the summer. Their landlord, so to speak, is a crusty old bum named Hans 
Klaus-Michael Gruber
.
"This three-hander could have made a nice little film in other hands, but Caraxs production costs became legendary. His permission to shoot on the Pont-Neuf ran out while delays stalled his production; Lavant broke his leg, which held up the film a year, according to some sources, although since he uses a crutch and wears a cast in the film, one wonders why. The broken leg is simply explained: Alex passes out in the middle of a boulevard late one night. Thrown off the real bridge, Carax moved his entire production to the South of France and built a giant set of the Pont-Neuf, including the facades of three buildings of the famous Samaritaine department store. This was not cheap."
The lovers are both reckless and secretive. Michele, who wears a dressing over one eye, doesn\t reveal for a long time that she is going blind. Alex loves her and yet would rather read her mail and break into her former home than ask her flat-out about herself. Hans keeps trying to evict her from the bridge "It\s all right for Alex, but not for a young girl like you", but when he finally shares his own story, it opens the floodgates for all three.
There is much here that is cheerfully reckless, as when Alex does cartwheels on the bridge parapet above the Seine did no authorities see him?. Or when the two of them steal a police speedboat so she can water-ski past the fireworks display on the night of the French bicentennial. Alex raises money by his fire-eating, his sweaty torso dancing in the middle of smoke and flames, and she pours drugs into the drinks of tourists to steal their money.
"All well and good in a different kind of film. But other scenes break with the gritty reality and go for Chaplinesque bathos. Missing-person posters of Michele go up all over Paris-- all over, on every Metro wall and construction site--and Alex sets them afire why is there no one else in the Metro?. Then he torches the van of the man who is hanging the posters, and the man burns alive. This melodramatic excess leads, after a time, to a romantic conclusion that seems to dare us to laugh; Carax piles one development on top of another until its not a story, its an exercise in absurdity."
All of this is not without charm. Juliette Binoche, from "
The English Patient
," Krzysztof Kieslowski\s "
Blue
" and Louis Malle\s "
Damage
," dares to play her character with the kind of broad strokes you\d find in a silent film, and old Klaus-Michael Gruber has a touching moment of confession as Hans. Denis Lavant is not a likable Alex, but then how could he be? His approach to romance is simple: He makes his most dramatic demonstration of love in her absence, by burning the posters so she will not leave him; when she\s there, he\s likely to be sullen, petulant or drunk. For two strong young people to embrace their lifestyle is itself an exercise in stylish defeatism; they have to choose to be miserable, and they do, wearing it well.
I felt a certain affection for "The Lovers on the Bridge." It is not the masterpiece its defenders claim, nor is it the completely self-indulgent folly described by its critics. It has grand gestures and touching moments of truth, perched precariously on a foundation of horsefeathers.
So troubled was its distribution history that Carax waited seven years to make another film, which confirmed his unshakably goofy world view. That was "
Pola X
," which opened the 1999 Cannes festival, and was a modern telling of Melville\s 19th century novel Pierre, about a young man\s idyllic relationship with his mother and his happy plans for marriage, all destroyed by the appearance of a strange dark woman who claims to be his father\s secret daughter. The movie "exists outside the categories of good and bad," I wrote from Cannes; "it is a magnificent folly." "The Lovers on the Bridge," on the other hand, exists just inside the category of good. I am not sure, thinking about the two films, that I don\t prefer "Pola X." If you have little taste or discipline as a filmmaker but great style and heedlessness, it may be more entertaining to go for broke than to fake a control you don\t possess.

Phenomenon 1996 Cast
John Travolta as George Malley
Kyra Sedgwick as Lace Pennamin
Forest Whitaker as Nate Pope
Robert Duvall as Doc
Directed by Jon Turteltaub
Produced by Barbara Boyle
Michael Taylor Written by
Gerald Dipego Drama, Fantasy, Science Fiction
Rated PG For Language and Mild Sensuality
117 minutes "The opening titles of “Phenomenon” plant a sly idea that the film\rdoes nothing to discourage. We see the star-filled sky, and then the letters of\rthe title settle into place with a subtle whoosh. We pick up “Close Encounters”\rvibes. Not long after, the films hero walks out under the stars and is\rstartled to see some kind of a weird white light, which zaps him from the\rheavens. Has he been touched by a UFO? Maybe. The hero is George Malley "
John Travolta
,\ra genial garage mechanic, of average intelligence, well liked in his small\rCalifornia town.
"After the visitation from the sky, he begins to get smarter. A\rlot smarter. He starts taking out six books a day from the local library and\rfiguring out things that had previously been beyond him. Hes able to learn a foreign\rlanguage by riffling through a textbook. This is not the George people know. It\ris the lament of “Phenomenon” that people do not like the unexpected. They want\rGeorge to continue to be George, no more, no less, so that he continues to fill\rthe same predictable place in their lives. A brilliant new George, winning at\rchess, predicting earthquakes, picking up strange vibes, is disturbing. “What\ris going on, George?” asks Lace "
Kyra Sedgwick
", the pretty divorced woman\rGeorge would like to be dating. “I need the simple truth!” She has the\rthankless role of the woman who demands an explanation that the audience knows\ris impossible to give: “I just asked you for one thing, George, and you\rcouldnt handle it!” Its about the only thing George cant handle; matters of\rthe heart are just as difficult to solve when youre a genius. The only people\rin town who can easily accept the new George are Doc "
Robert Duvall
, who\rconsiders him like a son, and Nate 
Forest Whitaker
", his best friend. With\rthem, George is able to share his enthusiasm for the daily cascade of\rdiscoveries. This is a good role for Travolta, who has an underlying sweetness\rand enthusiasm that is well used here. Theres not an ounce of circumspection in\rhis character, and when he gets his unexpected gift, he wants to share it. He\rcontacts scientists and universities, and is startled when the FBI turns up in\rits obligatory role as paranoid sniffer after suspicious behavior his interview\rwith a federal agent is a small gem. We know the general outlines of the story\rbefore, having been through somewhat similar territory with Cliff Robertsons “"
Charly
”\r1968.
"Although Charly was retarded and George is average, they are\rboth transformed through their blooming intelligence, and then in the third\ract, something happens that is not foreseen. I will not reveal what that is,\rexcept to say that the film will leave you with questions that it does not\rquite resolve. Maybe that’s the best thing. We know what happened to George,\rbut not precisely why, and whos to say if a UFO was involved or not? The heart\rof the story is in Georges character and his relationship with Lace who,\rapart from her obligatory demands for an explanation, is a good and\runderstanding woman. The film is essentially a good-hearted story about the\rrhythms of small-town life and the meaning of friendship, and if Georges gift\ris a mystery even to him, at least it inspires a lot of conversation. Like many\rsmall towns or movies set in small towns, this one has a bar where the locals\rprovide a chorus for all of the action, and after George begins spinning\rpaperclips in mid-air and breaking mirrors, they have the material for many a long\rbeery discussion. “Phenomenon” could have been more, I think. It might have pushed\rthe edges of its story a little harder, and found out things that would be more\rchallenging, or threatening, to George and the world he lives in. But thats not\rwhat its about. Its about change, acceptance and love, and it rounds those\rthree bases very nicely, even if it never quite gets to home."

Le Cercle Rouge 2003 Cast
Alain Delon as Corey
Gian Maria Volonte as Vogel
Yves Montand as Jansen
Andre Bourvil as Captain Mattei
Andre Ekyan as Rico
Francois Perier as Santi
Paul Crauchet as The Fence
Pierre Collet as Prison Guard
Written and Directed by Jean-Pierremelville
Crime, Drama, Foreign, Thriller Rated NR
Suitable For Mature Teenagers 140 minutes
Gliding almost without speech down the dawn streets of a wet Paris winter, these men in trench coats and fedoras perform a ballet of crime, hoping to win and fearing to die. Some are cops and some are robbers. To smoke for them is as natural as breathing. They use guns, lies, clout, greed and nerve with the skill of a magician who no longer even thinks about the cards. They share a code of honor which is not about what side of the law they are on, but about how a man must behave to win the respect of those few others who understand the code.
Jean-Pierre Melville
watches them with the eye of a concerned god, in his 1970 film "Le Cercle Rouge." His movie involves an escaped prisoner, a diamond heist, a police manhunt and mob vengeance, but it treats these elements as the magician treats his cards; the cards are insignificant, except as the medium through which he demonstrates his skills.
Melville is a director whose films are little known in America; he began before the French New Wave, died in 1973, worked in genres but had a stylistic elegance that kept his films from being marketed to the traditional genre audiences. His "
Bob le Flambeur
," now available on Criterion DVD, has been remade as "
The Good Thief
" and inspired elements of the two "
"Oceans Eleven"
" films, but all they borrowed was the plot, and that was the least essential thing about it.
Melville grew up living and breathing movies, and his films show more experience of the screen than of life. No real crooks or cops are this attentive to the details of their style and behavior. Little wonder that his great 1967 film about a professional hit man is named "
Le Samourai
"; his characters, like the samourai, place greater importance on correct behavior than upon success. Jarmusch\s "Ghost Dog" owes something to this value system. "Le Cercle Rouge," or "The Red Circle," refers to a saying of the Buddha that men who are destined to meet will eventually meet, no matter what. Melville made up this saying, but no matter; his characters operate according to theories of behavior, so that a government minister believes all men, without exception, are bad. And a crooked nightclub owner refuses to be a police informer because it is simply not in his nature to inform.
The movie stars two of the top French stars of the time,
Alain Delon
and
Yves Montand
, as well as
Gian Maria Volonte
, looking younger here than in the spaghetti Westerns, and with hair. But it is not a star vehicle--or, wait, it is a star vehicle, but the stars ride in it instead of the movie riding on them. All of the actors seem directed to be cool and dispassionate, to guard their feelings, to keep their words to themselves, to realize that among men of experience almost everything can go without saying.
As the film opens, we meet Corey Delon as he is released from prison. He has learned of a way to hold up one of the jewelry stores of Place Vendome. Then we meet Vogel Volonte, who is a handcuffed prisoner on a train, but picks the locks of the cuffs, breaks a window, leaps from the moving train, and escapes from the veteran cop Mattei 
Andre Bourvil
.
"Fate brings Vogel and Corey together. On the run in the countryside, Vogel hides in the trunk of Coreys car. Corey sees him do this, but we dont know he does. He drives into a muddy field, gets out of his car, stands away from it, and tells the man in the trunk he can get out. The man does, holding a gun that Corey must have known he would find in the trunk. They regard each other, face to face in the muddy field. Vogel wants a smoke. Corey throws him a pack and a lighter."
Notice how little they actually say before Corey says "Paris is your best chance" and Vogel gets back in the trunk. And then notice the precision and economy of what happens next. Corey\s car is being tailed by gunmen for a mob boss he relieved of a lot of money. It was probably due him, but still, that is no way to treat a mob boss. Corey pulls over. The gunsels tell him to walk toward the woods. He does. Then we hear Vogel tell them to drop their guns and raise their hands. Vogel picks up each man\s gun with a handkerchief and uses it to shoot the other man--so the fingerprints will indicate they shot each other. Corey risked his life on the expectation that Vogel would know what to do and do it, and Corey was right.
"There is one cool, understated scene after another. Note the way the police commissioner talks to the nightclub owner after he knows that the owners son, picked up in an attempt to pressure the owner, has killed himself. Note what he says, and what he doesnt say, and how he looks. And note, too, how Jansen, the Yves Montand character, comes into the plot, and think for a moment about why he doesnt want his share of the loot."
The heist itself is performed with the exactness we expect of a movie heist. We are a little startled to realize it is not the point of the film. In most heist movies, the screenplay cannot think beyond the heist, is satisfied merely to deliver it. "Le Cercle Rouge" assumes that the crooks will be skillful at the heist, because they are good workmen. The movie is not about their jobs but about their natures.
Melville fought for the French Resistance during the war. Manohla Dargis of the Los Angeles Times, in a review of uncanny and poetic perception, writes: "It may sound far-fetched, but I wonder if his obsessive return to the same themes didn\t have something to do with a desire to restore France\s own lost honor." The heroes of his films may win or lose, may be crooks or cops, but they are not rats.

I Am Love 2010 Cast
Tilda Swinton as Emma
Flavio Parenti as Edoardo Jr.
Edoardo Gabbriellini as Antonio
Marisa Berenson as Allegra
Alba Rohrwacher as Elisabetta
Pippo Delbono as Tancredi
Maria Paiato as Ida
Directed by Luca Guadagnino
Based on a story by Guadagnino
Written by Barbara Alberti
Ivan Cotroneo Walter Fasano
Drama, Foreign, Romance Rated R
for sexuality and nudity 120 minutes
Did she understand when she married her husband what sort of family she was joining? She knew they were rich Italian aristocrats, operators of textile mills in Milan. But did she understand that as a wife from Russia, she would serve and provide and even be loved, but would never truly be a member?
When we see Emma 
Tilda Swinton
 she is preparing the Recchi house for the birthday party of the patriarch. She seems to relate more as a caterer than as a hostess. At the head of the table is the grand old Edoardo 
Gabriele Ferzetti
. Among those gathered are his son and her husband, Tancredi 
Pippo Delbono
. The old man makes an unexpected announcement: He is retiring, and putting Tancredi in charge. But not Tancredi alone. His grandson, their son, Edo 
Flavio Parenti
 also will share the responsibility.
"Is Emma filled with joy? Her husband and son will inherit the dynasty? She is so calm and expert, its hard to say. Tilda Swinton is a daring actress who doesnt project emotions so much as embody them. “I Am Love” provides an ideal role for her, in that her actions speak instead of words. We learn she has her own private space, that after launching a family event, she likes to leave it running smoothly and retire to her room upstairs."
"The opening act of Luca Guadagninos film establishes the stature of the Recchi family as surely as the Corleones are established in “"
The Godfather
",” or the Salinas in Viscontis “"
The Leopard
.” It may be impossible to write about this film without evoking “The Leopard,” not simply because they both involve Italian aristocrats, but because they involve matters of succession, and the way that love and lust can breach the walls aristocrats live behind. Guadagnino makes the connection inescapable by the use of the name Tancredi; in “The Leopard,”
Alain Delon
pays the Salina nephew of that name.
The Recchi family has been living in a particular way for a long time. Cushioned by great wealth, working in an industry associated with style, never challenged, well-educated, its hungers cloaked in tradition, it occupies its place of privilege effortlessly. Emma speaks Italian fluently, but with a Russian accent, a reminder that she is not quite one of them.
Few actresses can embody urgent sexual desire so well as Swinton. She is realistic about such feelings. When she learns her daughter Elisabetta 
Alba Rohrwacher
 is a lesbian, she reacts not as a mother, possibly with shock, but as a woman, in surprise and curiosity. She has heard of such things. The heart has its reasons.
The feast opening the film is prepared by Antonio 
Edoardo Gabbriellini
", a friend of her son Edos. She consults with this young chef, and a feeling passes into her. Later, on a visit to her daughter in San Remo, she happens to see Antonio, and with decision follows him through the streets. This is all done without dialogue. The camera is pursuer and pursued. The longer she follows him, the more certain they must meet."
"Of course they make love. Actresses are often called upon to enact sex in the movies. Swinton does it differently with each character, understanding that sexuality is as distinctive as speech or taste. Emma is urgent as if a dam has burst, releasing not passion but happiness. Of course this affair threatens her relationship with her husband, her son and her family. But most long-established families have overcome the inconveniences of adultery. Continuity is more important than commitment. The film now observes the ways, not predictable, in which this new sexual act affects Emmas role."
All this time, Guadagnino has been paying due attention to other important members of the family. There is Allegra 
Marisa Berenson
, gatekeeper of her husband. There is the long-serving housekeeper Ida 
Maria Paiato
", who sees and understands everything and in many ways is Emmas refuge in the household. There is the personality of Emmas son, Edo, as yet untouched by the ordeals of business life, more open in his personal feelings. And there is the overarching sense in which the Recchi family embodies a tradition which, like a church, requires devotion if not belief."
“I Am Love” is an amazing film. It is deep, rich, human. It is not about rich and poor, but about old and new. It is about the ancient war between tradition and feeling. For this role, Tilda Swinton learned to speak Italian with a Russian accent, as Tilda Swinton would, but her performance is nothing as trivial as a feat of learning. She evokes Emma as a woman who for years has accepted the needs of the Recchis and discovers in a few days to accept her own needs. She must have been waiting a long time for Antonio, whoever he would be.

Tootsie 1982 Cast
Dustin Hoffman as Michael
Jessica Lange as Julie
Charles Durning as Les Nichols
Teri Garr as Sandy
Bill Murphy as Roommate
Dabney Coleman as Ron
Doris Belack as Rita
Sydney Pollack as Agent
Comedy, Romance Rated PG
116 minutes One of the most endearing things about "Tootsie," a\r\nmovie in which
Dustin Hoffman
plays a middle-aged actress, is that the actress\r\nis able to carry most of her own scenes as herself - even if she weren\t being\r\nplayed by Hoffman. "Tootsie" works as a story, not as a gimmick.
It also works as a lot of other things. "Tootsie" is\r\nthe kind of Movie with a capital M that they used to make in the 1940s, when\r\nthey weren\t afraid to mix up absurdity with seriousness, social comment with\r\nfarce, and a little heartfelt tenderness right in there with the laughs. This\r\nmovie gets you coming and going.
Hoffman\r\nstars as Michael Dorsey, a character maybe not unlike Hoffman himself in his\r\nyounger days. Michael is a New York actor, bright, aggressive, talented - and\r\nunemployable. "You mean nobody in New York wants to hire me?" he asks\r\nhis agent, incredulously. "I\d go farther than that, Michael," his\r\nagent says. "Nobody in Hollywood wants to hire you, either."
Michael\r\nhas a bad reputation for taking stands, throwing tantrums, and interpreting\r\nroles differently than the director. How to get work? He goes with a friend\r\n
Teri Garr
" to an audition for a soap opera. The character is a middle-age\r\nwoman hospital administrator. When his friend doesnt get the job, Michael goes\r\nhome, thinks, decides to dare, and dresses up in drag and goes to an audition\r\nhimself. And, improvising brilliantly, he gets the role."
That\r\nleads to "Tootsie\s" central question: Can a 40-ish New York actor\r\nfind health, happiness and romance as a 40-ish New York actress? Dustin Hoffman\r\nis actually fairly plausible as "Dorothy," the actress. If his voice\r\nisn\t quite right, a Southern accent allows it to squeak by. The wig and the\r\nglasses are a little too much, true, but in an uncanny way the woman played by\r\nHoffman looks like certain actual women who look like drag queens. Dorothy\r\nmight have trouble passing in Evanston, but in Manhattan, nobody gives her a\r\nsecond look.
"Tootsie"\r\nmight have been content to limit itself to the complications of New York life\r\nin drag; it could have been "Victor/Victoria Visits Elaine\s." But\r\nthe movie\s a little more ambitious than that. Michael Dorsey finds to his\r\ninterest and amusement that Dorothy begins to take on a life of her own. She\s\r\na liberated eccentric, a woman who seems sort of odd and funny at first, but\r\ngrows on you and wins your admiration by standing up for what\s right.
"One\r\nof the things that bothers Dorothy is the way the soap operas chauvinist\r\ndirector "
Dabney Coleman
 mistreats and insults the attractive young actress\r\n
Jessica Lange
" who plays Julie, a nurse on the show. Dorothy and Julie become\r\nfriends and finally close confidants. Dorothys problem, however, is that the\r\nman inside her is gradually growing uncontrollably in love with Julie."
"There\r\nare other complications. Julies father "
Charles Durning
, a gruff, friendly,\r\nno-nonsense sort, lonely but sweet, falls in love with Dorothy. Michael hardly\r\nknows how to deal with all of this, and his roommate 
Bill Murray
 isn\t much\r\nhelp. Surveying Dorothy in one of her new outfits, he observes drily,\r\n"Don\t play hard to get."
"Tootsie"\r\nhas a lot of fun with its plot complications; we get almost every possible\r\nvariation on the theme of mistaken sexual identities. The movie also manages to\r\nmake some lighthearted but well-aimed observations about sexism. It also pokes\r\nsatirical fun at soap operas, New York show business agents and the Manhattan\r\nsocial pecking order. And it turns out to be a touching love story, after all -\r\nso touching that you may be surprised how moved you are at the conclusion of\r\nthis comedy.

The Shadow 1994 Cast
Alec Baldwin as Lamont Cranston/
John Lone as Shiwan Kahn
Penelope Ann Miller as Margo Lane
Peter Boyle as Moe Shrevnitz
Directed by Russell Mulcahy
Action, Adventure, Fantasy, Science Fiction, Thriller Rated PG-13
For Fantasy Action Violence 112 minutes
"The Shadow" opens in Tibet, where a decadent villain with long purple fingernails lounges in an opium den where the execution of his enemies - and friends - hardly raises an eyebrow. This is Ying Ko, the first of three names the Shadow will use, and he is a worthless piece of work until he is taken in hand by an ancient wise man who forces him to reform. Thus does Ying Ko become Lamont Cranston, better known as The Shadow. And thus does he move from Tibet to "that most wretched lair of villainy we know as . . . New York City." If you grew up on radio serials and pulp magazines, this is a familiar world. But "The Shadow" hasn\t been heard on radio in 40 years, the pulps have crumbled to dust, and still the tacky romanticism of The Shadow retains its power: Who knows what evil lurks in the hearts of men? A fiendish laugh, and then: The Shadow knows.
"The Shadow" is the kind of movie that plays better, the more baggage you bring to it. If you respond to film noir, if you like dark streets and women with scarlet lips and big fast cars with running boards, the look of this movie will work some kind of magic.
The story itself may not be so mesmerizing, but who really cares? Style and tone are everything with a movie like this, which wants to bring to life a dark secret place in the lurid pulp imagination.
The movie stars
Alec Baldwin
as Lamont Cranston, aka the Shadow, and he is a good choice for the role. Sleekly handsome, with a glint in his dark eyes, he remains utterly solemn while delivering lines like, "The weed of crime bears bitter fruit" and "Inside you beats a heart of darkness." He wears a cape and a wide-brimmed hat, and stalks the night streets, fighting crime. The sound of his voice seems to echo from inside a large, damp room, and is a counterpoint for Jerry Goldsmith\s score, made out of sad brass sounds and tremulous strings.
His nemesis is the last survivor of Genghis Khan, Shiwan Kahn 
John Lone
, who says, "Kahn conquered half the world. My task is to finish the job." Shiwan shares most of the mystical powers which the old mystic gave to the Shadow, including, of course, "the power to cloud men\s minds." In a plot which inevitably involves world domination, they are surrounded by many minds to cloud, including those of the police commissioner 
Jonathan Winters
, a mad scientist 
Tim Curry
 a merely goofy scientist Ian McKellan, and gangsters who find themselves shooting at phantoms.
One mind that remains mostly unclouded belongs to Margo Lane 
Penelope Ann Miller
, a slinky blonde who possesses unrealized mental powers of her own, falls in love with Cranston, and begins to pick up vibes on a wave length he thought was private. Love affairs involving super heroes are always faintly funny, because the protagonist\s first responsibility is to his legend, not his romance; "The Shadow" has a funny exchange where Margo purringly describes a dream "I was lying naked on the beach in the South Seas . . ." and then Cranston shares his dream "I dreamed I tore all the skin off my face and was somebody else underneath.".
The look of the film somehow supports this foolishness. The director,
Russell Mulcahy
, whose earlier career was not distinguished by "Highlander" or, for that matter, "
Highlander 2: The Quickening
," has assembled a talented technical team that recreates New York City as an Art Deco nightmare. There are diabolical dangers, like a water tank in which Cranston is sealed to drown; hallucinatory real estate, like a hotel which Kahn makes invisible by hypnotizing the entire city; and sexy props like the speedboat-sized Yellow Cab driven by Cranston\s faithful retainer Moe 
Peter Boyle
.
If the movie is finally just a little less than the sum of its parts, maybe that\s appropriate. The original "Shadow" novels were pounded out by Walter Gibson at a rate of 60,000 works a week, and consumed by magazine and radio audiences not because they were individually great, but because collectively they created a dream.
The Shadow was created during the Depression, when the mean streets were dark and threatening, and it was comforting that there was a denizen of the night who fought for good, not evil. It still is.

Wyatt Earp 1994 Cast
Kevin Costner as Wyatt Earp
Dennis Quaid as Doc Holliday
Gene Hackman as Nicholas Earp
Jeff Fahey as Ike Clanton
Directed by Lawrence Kasdan
Action, Drama, Western Rated PG-13
For Violence, Profanity and Sensuality 181 minutes
"Wyatt Earp" plays as if they took "Tombstone" and pumped it full of hot air. It involves many of the same characters and much of the same story, but little of the tension and drama. It\s a rambling, unfocused biography of Wyatt Earp 
Kevin Costner
", starting when hes a kid and following his development from an awkward would-be lawyer into a slick gunslinger. This is a long journey, in a three-hour film that needs better pacing."
"Its obvious that the movies intentions are serious. It doesnt want to be just one more retelling of the gunfight at the OK Corral. The subject is the whole life span of Wyatt Earp, but unfortunately the movie isnt able to make much of the parts we dont already know about. Earp lived a long time he died in 1929, 48 years after the famous gunfight in Tombstone but his moment of fame was brief, and we are no more interested in Wyatt Earp as an old man than in King Lear as a young one."
The screenplay, written by
Dan Gordon
in collaboration with the director,
Lawrence Kasdan
, employs the time-honored biopic method of establishing a few shorthand themes and repeating them again and again. Young Wyatt gets nightly lectures at the dinner table from his father 
Gene Hackman
 about the importance of blood bonds: "Family comes first!" He absorbs this lesson to such a degree that it explains, in this version anyway, much of his motivation at the OK Corral and afterwards.
As a young man, Earp resembles old Jimmy Stewart characters.
Bashful but single-minded, he turns down the offers of fast women in saloons because he intends to marry a girl back home 
Annabeth Gish
.
"He comes a-courtin with flowers, and before long they are married and living in a cozy cottage. Then she dies tragically, and he seems to vow never to trust his emotions with any non-family member again."
"The movie follows Earps progress through the West, his employment as a stagecoach driver and a Wells Fargo man, and his stints as a lawman in Dodge City and Tombstone. Curiously, because the script places such emphasis on family, his brothers do not emerge very vividly. Even the strong actor"
Michael Madsen
", as Virgil Earp, has so little dialogue and screen time that he doesnt emerge as truly individual. And the brothers James and Morgan are even less visible; the wives or mistresses of the three Earp brothers make more of an impression, if only because they spend so much time arguing with Wyatts notions of family honor and duty."
The character who is always in the foreground of the Earp saga is Doc Holliday, the dentist and gambler who casts his lot with the Earps. Dying of tuberculosis, he has nothing to lose in lending his gun to their battles.
Dennis Quaid
plays the character in a stunning masquerade; having lost 38 pounds and grown a mustache for the role, he is scarcely recognizable. But his performance, and the whole movie, suffer from comparison with "Tombstone," released in December 1993, which was more intense and clearly told. Quaid\s performance is laconic and droll, but lacks the humor and the sublime detachment of Val Kilmer\s in the earlier film. And, for that matter, Kurt Russell\s Wyatt Earp was more self-assured, more sharply defined, than Kevin Costner\s character.
If the characters in "Wyatt Earp" remain vague despite all of their screen time, the story-telling also needs tightening.
"Theres an early sequence when Wyatt, grieving over the death of his wife, turns to drink and steals a horse. Hes arrested and jailed, and saved from hanging when his father Hackman turns up and fixes things. But the jail is in Arkansas, and the movie creates the impression that Hackman had by then moved to California. How did he get the news and return East in time to save his son, in the days before railroads?"
One sequence late in the film could have been left out with great benefit. The Earps are returning on a train with the body of a dead brother, and are alerted that they may be ambushed. As the train pauses at a station late at night, there is a complex gunfight in the shadows, as characters dart around the cars and fire at one another.
"This whole sequence is handled so confusingly that its hard to get an idea of the strategy, the progress, or the outcome. Another sequence -- a flashback at the end, or Earp quelling an angry mob -- is also pointless."
"More to the point, the movie isnt sure what it wants to say about Wyatt Earp. Was he a hero? A civilized man who became a killer? A gifted lawman? A man who initiated violence? The movie votes for all four choices. There is also a lot of screen time devoted unprofitably to Earps romantic life. After the death of the first wife, he has a long-time relationship with a hooker "
Mare Winningham
, whose best qualification is that she makes few demands.
But she starts making a lot of them after Wyatt falls for the beautiful Josie 
Joanna Going
, an independent woman from San Francisco.
The hooker makes several suicide attempts, while Josie tries to adapt herself to the situation, but finally there is a scene where Earp is trying to deal with death, violence and two screaming woman, all at once, and it goes over the top. Costner\s character isn\t written clearly enough for us to understand his confusion about his liaisons; if they are only sexual, then why does he masochistically allow them to continue? Is it unfair to compare "Wyatt Earp" to "Tombstone" simply because they have been released in the same six month window? Perhaps. "Wyatt Earp" is certainly the more ambitious project. But "Tombstone" was more clear about its goals, and more certain about how to reach them. It forced the comparison upon me. "Wyatt Earp" has brave pretensions and a large canvas, but it is finally just too slow, and not very compelling.

Into the Abyss: A Tale of Death, A Tale of Life 2011 Cast
Richard Lopez Michael James Perry
Damon Hall Charles Richardson
Lisa Sotler-Balloun Jason Burkett
Jared Talbert Amanda West
Delbert Burkett Melyssa Thompson-Burkett
Fred Allen Directed by
Werner Herzog "Into the Abyss" may be the saddest film
Werner Herzog
has ever made. It regards a group of miserable lives, and in finding a few faint glimmers of hope only underlines the sadness.
The documentary centers on two young men in prison.
Michael Perry
"is on Death Row in Huntsville, Texas, Americas most productive assembly line for executions, and on the day Herzog spoke with him had eight days to live."
Jason Burkett
", his accomplice in the stupid murders of three people, is serving a 40-year sentence. They killed because they wanted to drive a friends red Camaro."
"Herzog opposes the death penalty, which America and Japan are the only developed nations still imposing. But the film isnt a polemic. Herzog became curious about the case, took a small crew to Huntsville and Conroe, Texas, where the murders took place, and spoke to the killers, members of their families and those of their victims. He obtains interviews of startling honesty and impact. Ive learned that he met his subjects only once, on the day of the interviews, and the film presents their first conversations. Ive long felt Herzogs personality is compelling and penetrating, and in evidence I could offer this film about Texans who are so different from the German director."
Herzog keeps a much lower profile than in many of his documentaries. He is not seen, and his off-camera voice quietly asks questions that are factual, understated and simply curious. His subjects talk willingly. He asks difficult follow-up questions. He is not very interested in the facts there is no doubt about guilt here, but in looking into the eyes and souls of people who were directly involved.
"Why did Perry die and not Burkett, when both were convicted for the same crimes? We meet Burketts father, Delbert, who also is in prison serving a life sentence. In his testimony at his sons trial, he blamed himself for the boys worthless upbringing. This apparently influenced two women jurors to pity the boy — or perhaps identify with the father. Delbert seems today a decent and reflective man. He bitterly regrets that he failed to take advantage of a college scholarship, dropped out of high school not long before graduation, and went wrong. He sees his mistake clearly now — too late for himself, too late for his son."
"Perry and Burkett are uneducated, rootless, callow, lacking in personal resources. Delbert perhaps has benefitted from life in prison, as his son may. We meet Melyssa Burkett, who married Jason Burkett in prison and is now pregnant with his child — although, as Herzog observes, conjugal visits were not allowed. How did she become pregnant? She did, thats all. Herzog never sensationalizes, never underlines, expresses no opinions. He listens."
We also meet Captain
Fred Allen
", who was for many years in charge of the guard detail on Huntsvilles Death Row, including the years in which George Bush turned down one appeal after another. He starts talking with Herzog and is swept up by memory and emotion, explaining why one day he simply walked away from his job and decided, after overseeing more than 100 executions, that he was opposed to the death penalty. What he has to say about one crucial event in his life is one of the most profound statements I can imagine about the death penalty."
"The people in this film, without exception, cite God as a force in their lives. The killers, their relatives, the relatives of their victims, the police, everyone. God has a plan. It is all Gods will. God will forgive. Their lives are in His hands. They must accept the will of the Lord. Condemned or bereft, guilty or heartbroken, they all apparently find comfort in Gods plan. What Herzog concludes about their faith he does not say."
"Opposition to the death penalty, in part, comes down to this: No one deserves to be assigned the task of executing another person. I think thats what Captain Allen is saying. Herzog may agree, although he doesnt say so. In some of his films he freely shares his philosophy and insights. In this film, he simply looks. He always seems to know where to look."

Remember Me 2010 Cast
Robert Pattinson as Tyler
Emilie de Ravin as Ally Craig
Chris Cooper as Sgt. Neil Craig
Lena Olin as Diane Hirsch
Tate Ellington as Aidan Hall
Ruby Jerins as Caroline
Pierce Brosnan as Mr. Hawkins
Directed by Allen Coulter
Written by Will Fetters
Drama, Romance Rated PG-13
for violence, sexual content, language and smoking 113 minutes
"Remember Me" tells a sweet enough love story, and tries to invest it with profound meaning by linking it to a coincidence. It doesn\t work that way. People meet, maybe they fall in love, maybe they don\t, maybe they\re happy, maybe they\re sad. That\s life. If, let us say, a refrigerator falls out of a window and squishes one of them, that\s life, too, but it\s not a story many people want to see. We stand there looking at the blood seeping out from under the Kelvinator and ask with Peggy Lee,
is that all there is?
"You cant exactly say the movie cheats. It brings the refrigerator onscreen in the first scene. It ties the action to a key date in Kelvinator history, one everybody knows even if thats all they know about refrigerators. But come on. This isnt the plot for a love story, its the plot for a Greek tragedy. It may be true, as King Lear tells us, that"
"as flies to wanton boys are we to th gods."
"But we dont want to think ourselves as flies, or see fly love stories. Bring on the eagles."
The fact is, "Remember Me" is a well-made movie. I cared about the characters. I felt for them. Liberate them from the plot\s destiny, which is an anvil around their necks, and you might have something.
The film opens on a New York subway platform. A young girl witnesses the senseless murder of her mother. We meet her again as a young woman. She is Ally Craig 
Emilie de Ravin
, from "Lost", the daughter of a police sergeant 
Chris Cooper
". Shes in college. Having lost his wife, he is intensely protective of her."
We meet a feckless young man named Tyler Hawkins 
Robert Pattinson
. He slouches about trying to look like a dissipated Robert Pattinson. Drinks too much, smokes too much, has the official four-day stubble on his face, hair carefully messed up, bad attitude. He lives in a pigpen of an apartment with a roommate named Aidan 
Tate Ellington
, who might have been played by
Oscar Levant
back in the days when such roommates were obnoxious, OK, but bearable.
"Tyler gets drunk one night, is thrown out of a club, gets in a fight, the cops are called, and when its almost all over, he shoves one of the cops -- Sgt. Craig, of course. Young drunks: It is"
extremely unwise
to shove the cop who is about to let you off with a warning. Tyler is thrown in the slammer. Not long after in school, the snaky Aidan tells Tyler that their pretty classmate Ally is the daughter of that very cop. He dares Tyler to ask her out and then dump her in revenge.
"Aidan is a jerk, but logically Tyler is, too, because this set-up is morally reprehensible. However, to the surprise of no one in the audience, Tyler falls for Amy and neglects to break up with her. Their courtship is a sensitive, well-acted progression through stages of mutual trust and Tylers gradual rediscovery of his own real feelings."
"Theres an intriguing subplot. Tylers parents are divorced. His father is the immensely wealthy Charles Hawkins "
Pierce Brosnan
, whose office looks larger than small airplane terminals. Diane, his mother 
Lena Olin
", has remarried. Tylers beloved kid sister Caroline "
Ruby Jerins
 lives with her. Only with Caroline can Tyler relax and drop the sullen facade, showing warmth and love. Until he meets Ally -- and then there are two safe harbors, and his rebirth begins.
"Pierce Brosnan plays a key role in the process. He has only a few significant scenes in the movie, but plays them so well that he convincingly takes a three-step character development and makes it into an emotional evolution. Meanwhile, Ally and Tyler encounter fierce opposition to their relationship from her dad, who cant be blamed because as a cop, he saw Tyler at his drunken worst."
"These people and their situation grow more involving as the movie moves along. Then theres a perfect storm of coincidences to supply the closing scenes. Thats what I object to."
"If we invest in a films characters, what happens to them should be intrinsically important to us. We dont require emotional reinforcement to be brought in from outside. The movie tries to borrow profound meaning, but succeeds only in upstaging itself so overwhelmingly that its characters become irrelevant. Im guessing the message is: Parents, when you have a rebel child who hates you, someday you will learn what a good person that child really was. Its the dream of every tormented adolescent. Many of them become parents themselves and get their turn at being resented. Such is life."

Sebastian 1968 Cast
Dirk Bogarde as Sebastian
Susannah York as Becky
Lilli Palmer as Elsa
John GieIgud as Intelligence Head
Nigel Davenport as Gen. Phillips
Directed by David Greene
From a screenplay by Gerald Vaughn-Hughes In
Drama, Foreign 100 minutes
Early in the production of "Sebastian," somebody should have called a meeting to figure out what the movie was about. I guess nobody did.
What we are stuck with, then, is a movie that moves confidently in three directions, arriving nowhere with a splendid show of style.
At first it seems to be a thriller about a code-cracking operation.
Dirk Bogarde
has a corps of girls who doodle on scratch pads while a big computer sets up code patterns. "Look out for Group Six," Bogarde warns over his Intercom. "I think it\s a dummy group. Look for recurring cyclical patterns." The girls all scribble furiously.
"So far, so good. Theres even a paternal head of intelligence "
John Gielgud
 to make the traditional speech about how the Security of the Western World, indeed, of All Free Men, depends upon Bogarde cracking the latest code.
But then the whole operation gets shuffled into the background, somehow, and the movie seems to be about a love affair between Bogarde and the fetching
Susannah York
. Such love is impossible, of course, because of the inhuman security pressures put upon code-crackers by neo-Fascist security spies.
"Just as weve adjusted to the new state of affairs, a left-wing activist of a certain age "
Lilli Palmer
 turns up to remind Bogarde of their old love affair. Everyone allemandes left, like in a square dance, and Miss Palmer leaks some information to the press. Then Bogarde resigns and goes back to his old college at Oxford University in England.
One day are you still there? Gielgud comes to Bogarde with yet another code upon which the western World depends, etc. Then Bogarde goes searching for
Miss York
. No luck. Lots more stuff with the computers. Girls scribble furiously. "Watch Group Six -- it may be a clinker." Left-wing ex-mistress turns up again. More paternal Gielgud advice. Strange interlude at a party, at which someone gives Bogarde LSD because the cameraman was complaining the movie was almost over and he hadn\t had a chance to try out his psychedelic special effects.
Then in a spectacular and tender denouement, boy, having met and lost girl, finds girl again. Turns out Miss York has had Bogarde\s baby in the meantime. Tender reconciliation. Then Bogarde, playing with baby\s rattle, suddenly distinguishes pattern. A-ha! The rattle sounds like the new code! Is it? "Quick," says Bogarde, finding a milk bottle full of pennies in the kitchen, "arrange these in seven rows of 13 each. I think I\m onto something."
But he never says what.

Terminal Velocity 1994 Cast
Charlie Sheen as Ditch Brodie
Nastassja Kinski as Chris Morrow
James Gandolfini as Ben Pinkwater
Christopher McDonald as Kerr
Directed by Deran Sarafian
Action, Thriller Rated PG-13
For Scenes Of Strong Action Violence, and For Brief Strong Language 102 minutes
You\ve gotta hand it to "Terminal Velocity:" This movie may be dumb as a box of shredded wheat, but it has the damnedest action sequence I\ve seen since
Arnold Schwarzenegger
blasted the bad guy with the missile in "
True Lies
."
Nastassja Kinski
is locked in the trunk of a red Cadillac, which is taken aboard a cargo plane.
Charlie Sheen
pursues in another plane, walks on its wing, hauls himself aboard the cargo plane, and then finds himself, Kinski and the Cadillac all falling through the air - with a villain on the hood shooting at him. This is an assignment for Houdini.
Sheen\s behavior in this and other scenes is so close to the self-parody of his work in the "Hot Shots!" movies that he almost seems to be telling us something - such as, that he takes the movie with less than perfect seriousness. No wonder. It\s based on such a goofy premise that with just a nudge here and a pun there it could easily have become "Hot Shots Part Cinq" and taken advantage of the franchise. It\s not so much that Sheen can keep a straight face in any situation, as that he always seems to be testing himself with the situations he gets himself into.
In "Terminal Velocity" he plays a skydiving instructor so reckless he\s had 12 safety violations in the last month. He\s the kind of guy who paints "Kiss This" on his derriere and paraglides into downtown Phoenix. One day a beautiful blonde Kinski turns up at his skydiving school and wants an instant lesson. That sets off a long chain of events involving mistaken identities, stolen gold, three-legged dogs, and the KGB or, as Sheen calls it, "the KG used-to-B". By the end of the movie, needless to say, nothing less than the survival of the free world is at stake.
"I dare not reveal too much of the plot, although its so absurd that even Kinski giggles while explaining its finer points."
"The purpose of the movie is essentially to provide a platform for stunts and special effects so weird that we watch goggle-eyed, wondering how in Gods name theyre gonna get out of each predicament. Kinski is apparently doomed in so many different situations in the movie that it becomes a running gag."
There are times when
Deran Sarafian
, the director, seems so enthralled by movie formulas that he uses them even in the face of common sense. Sheen, for example, is always getting jumped from behind. Fine; except how do you explain a late scene where he is jumped from behind by a guy who has no reason to do so, and starts talking to him moments later? It\s like they were using a computer scriptwriting program that inserted "JUMPED FROM BEHIND" before every dialogue scene.
Sheen seems aware of the movie\s comic possibilities, and must surely have had a smile on his face when he designed his character\s haircut, which seems inspired by the pompadour of the hero of a little-seen but long-remembered movie named "Johnny Suede." Kinski has a hair motif, too - it\s always in her eyes - but she brings a bright, bemused air to her character, and has fun juggling various accents.
Is there a reason to see this movie? I am reminded of categories in the Michelin travel guides. "Terminal Velocity" does not deserve a Journey or even a Detour, but it is indeed a Sight.

A Mighty Wind 2003 Cast
Christopher Guest as Mark Shubb
Michael McKean as Jerry Palter
Fred Willard as Mike Lafontaine
"Catherine OHara" as Mickey
Eugene Levy as Mitch
Bob Balaban as Steinbloom
Parker Posey as Sissy Knox
Ed Begley Jr. as Lars
Harry Shearer as Alan Burrows
Directed by Christopher Guest
Written by Guest
Eugene Levy Comedy, Documentary, Music
Rated PG-13 For Sex-Related Humor
92 minutes If your idea of the ultimate circle of hell is singing along with
Burl Ives
on "I Know an Old Lady Who Swallowed a Fly"--if even as a child you refused to go "hee haw, hee haw"--then "A Mighty Wind" will awaken old memories. Christopher Guest\s new mockumentary is about a reunion of three groups from the 1960s folk boom, and in the film\s final concert, the audience is indeed required to imitate chickens and horses.
The premise: The beloved folk promoter Irving Steinbloom has passed away, and his son Jonathan 
Bob Balaban
 wants to stage a concert in his honor at Town Hall, legendary site of so many folk performances. He assembles the relentlessly upbeat New Main Street Singers, the Folksmen Guest,
Harry Shearer
,
Michael McKean
 and--the stars of the show--the long-estranged Mitch and Mickey 
Eugene Levy
and
"Catherine OHara"
.
These acts are all uncannily close to types we vaguely remember from "Hootenanny" and other shows, if we are over 40, and "A Mighty Wind" does for aging folkies what Rob Reiner\s "This Is Spinal Tap" did for aging heavy metal fans. If you ever actually spent money on an album by the Brothers Four, you may feel you vaguely remember some of the songs.
Guest follows the general outlines of the real and wonderful documentary "
"The Weavers: Wasnt That a Time!"
," joining his characters in their current lives, and then leading them through apprehensions and rehearsals to their big concert. The Folksmen are the most analytical about their comeback "It wasn\t retro then, but it\s retro now", the New Main Street Singers the most inanely cheerful most of the members weren\t born when the original group was formed, and Mitch and Mickey the most fraught with painful old memories and in Mitch\s case, new emotional traumas.
Mitch and Mickey dominate the film, providing a dramatic story that takes on a life of its own. Mitch is played by Levy as a deeply neurotic man who doubts he can still sing or even remember lyrics, and who still has a broken heart because a famous onstage kiss with Mickey did not lead to lasting offstage romance. When he disappears from backstage shortly before showtime, we may be reminded of Ringo\s solo walk in "
"A Hard Days Night"
." Guest surrounds his talent with the usual clueless types he likes to skewer in his films.
Fred Willard
, hilarious as the color commentator in "Best in Show," is back playing a promoter and onetime TV star who was famous for five minutes for the catch-phrase "Wha\ Happened?" He laughs at his own jokes to demonstrate to his silent listeners that they are funny.
Ed Begley
Jr. plays an obtuse public television executive named Lars, whose speech is punctuated by an impenetrable thicket of Yiddish. Balaban, as the dutiful son and impresario, frets over every detail of the performance, and is the singularly ill-at-ease emcee.
A lot of the movie consists of music, much of it written by Guest and other collaborators in the cast, and that is an enjoyment and a problem. The songs actually do capture the quality of the lesser groups of the time. They are performed in uncanny imitations of early TV musical staging. The movie demolishes any number of novelty songs with the Folksmen\s version of "Eat at Joe\s," based on a faulty neon sign that reads, "E ... A ... O." But there comes a point when the movie becomes ... well, performances and not comedy. The final act of the movie mostly takes place during the televised concert, and almost against its will takes on the dynamic of a real concert and not a satirical one.
There is another difficulty: Guest is rather fond of his characters. He didn\t hate his targets in "Best in Show" or "Spinal Tap," but he skewered them mercilessly, while the key characters in "A Mighty Wind," especially Levy and O\Hara, take on a certain weight of complexity and realism that edges away from comedy and toward sincere soap opera.
There were many times when I laughed during "A Mighty Wind" not least at lines like, "the kind of infectious that it\s good to spread around". But the edge is missing from Guest\s usual style. Maybe it\s because his targets are, after all, so harmless. The deluded "Spinal Tap" and the ferocious dog owners in "Best in Show" want to succeed and prevail. The singers in "A Mighty Wind" are grateful to be remembered, and as we watch them, we cut them the kind of slack we often do for aging comeback acts. Hey, the Beach Boys may be old, fat and neurotic, but we don\t want to spoil the fun by taking their T-Bird away.
"Too respectful? Answer is blowing in the Wind"

Woman On Top 2000 Cast
Penelope Cruz as Isabella
Murilo Benicio as Toninho
Harold Perrineau Jr. as Monica
Mark Feuerstein as Cliff
John De Lancie as Alex
Anne Ramsay as Tv Director
Directed by Fina Torres
Written by Vera Blasi
Comedy, Drama, Romance Rated R
For Some Strong Sexuality and Language 93 minutes
"Woman on Top" is like one of those lightweight 1950s Universal romances, depending for its charm on the appeal of the actors and supplying them with a story lighter than air. Even now, the formula seduces us for an hour or so before the movie sinks under the weight of its dim-wittedness. These characters in this story need to be smarter. And yet two of the leads,
Penelope Cruz
and
Harold Perrineau
Jr., are wonderful, and emerge untouched from the wreckage.
Cruz plays Isabella, a woman from the enchanted Brazilian state of Bahia, who is an artist with food the character owes something to Tita, the heroine of "Like Water for Chocolate". When she cooks, aromas waft from her pot and under the noses of men, and it is love at first bite. She falls for the macho hunk Toninho 
Murilo Benicio
", marries him, slaves in his restaurant and is happy. There is one technicality. She was born with motion sickness. It doesnt affect her if shes in control. In a car, she must drive. She prefers the stairs to the elevator. And in bed, she has to be on top."
This drives Toninho crazy, and she catches him with another woman. "I\m a man!" he cries. "I have to be on top sometimes !" But in a rage she flies off to San Francisco and moves in with her best friend, Monica Jones, who is a transvestite played by Perrineau in a performance both funny and endearing. "Monica Jones" doesn\t sound like the name of someone who grew up in Salvador, the capital of Bahia, but then this is one of those multinational movies where the ethnic flavor is suggested by speaking English with an accent.
Isabella\s cooking soon wins her a show on local TV, with Monica as her sidekick, and Cruz is bewitching as she demonstrates how to inhale the soul of the pepper, and how to teach your fingers to salt without thinking. Cruz is bewitching all through the movie, but her beauty and charm have to pull a heavy train of cliches and inevitable developments--as when the national network execs want her to "look less ethnic," use Tabasco instead of real peppers, wear a low-cut dress, work under brighter lights and "lose the freak" Monica. Her American producer and would-be boyfriend 
Mark Feuerstein
 loves her cooking but sides with the suits, and what happens next will be predictable for all but those seeing their first motion picture.
Cruz is a Spanish star who was recently electrifying in Pedro Almodovar\s "
All About My Mother
," and was indescribably sexy and funny in "Jamon, Jamon" 1992, which translates as "Ham, Ham" and which you should put at the top of the list of films you really should have seen. "Woman on Top" wants to combine the sexual freedom of Almodovar with the magical realism of "Like Water for Chocolate," but succeeds in doing for its sources what the TV execs want to do to Isabella: Going for the broad and dull commercial approach instead of the wicked inside curve.
And yet Cruz herself is lovable and charismatic, and we can just about believe it when she walks down the street, and hundreds of men follow her like sheep. Perrineau is lovable, too; he plays Monica not as a stereotyped drag queen but as a character who carries his own comic weight in the movie. The performance is all the more impressive since Perrineau the narrator of HBO\s "Oz" and the man killed by the bear in "
The Edge
" is not a professional transvestite but is simply playing a role--so well, he\s invaluable in every scene he\s in and steals his share.
"But the story is a slow slog toward the obvious. The evil TV execs are out of the Recycled Character Department. The Brazilian husband is a convenience, not a necessity. The American producer is a dope. And the movie plays its story so very safely that it sidesteps all the comic and romantic possibilities in the Monica character. Shes more like a mascot, when in a smarter movie she would have been the wild card."
"This is the kind of movie you sort of like, and yet even while youre liking it, youre thinking how much better these characters and this situation could have been with a little more imagination and daring. Starting with Isabella and Monica, what did they have to lose?"

"The Private Navy of Sgt. OFarrell 1968" Cast
Bob Hope "as Sgt. OFarrell"
Phyllis Diller as Nurse Krause
Jeffrey Hunter as Lt. Jones
Gina Lollobrigida as Maria
John Myhers as Lt. Comdr. Snavely
Mako as Ishimuna
production John Beck
Directed by Frank Tashlin
Photographed by Alan Stensvold
Somewhere toward the middle of Bob Hope\s "The Private Navy of Sgt. O\Farrell," it struck me that there are two kinds of movie comedies. One kind depends upon the situation to get laughs, and the other depends upon jokes.
In the first category are W. C. Fields, Chaplin and "
The Graduate
." In the second are the Marx Brothers sometimes, Abbott and Costello, and Hope.
Whatever else it may be, "The Graduate" is a very funny movie. But there\s hardly a one-liner in it, unless it\s "Plastics, Benjamin, plastics,\\ and that hardly holds up by itself. "The Graduate" is funny because it presents an essentially impossible situation and works it out logically, just as Fields did in "The Fatal Glass of Beer."
The new Hope movie takes the other route: a basically possible situation which is not worked out at all, but left as the backdrop for jokes. This was good on the radio, where the spoken word had to carry the humor, but in the movies it gets a little tiresome. And the striking thing about "The Private Navy of Sgt. O\Farrell" is how completely it neglects the humorous possibilities of film.
Hope plays an Army sergeant assigned to a Navy base during World War II. Most of his thoughts are devoted to a supply ship filled with beer, which has sunk somewhere offshore. How to get the beer? A couple of schemes are considered before Hope realizes the prevailing currents will float the beer right toward his island.
To this basic plot are added a few routine complications.
Gina Lollobrigida
falls in love with Hope early in the picture, and later inexplicably turns up in a sailboat thousands of miles out in the Pacific.
Phyllis Diller
is assigned to the island as a nurse and makes still more jokes about her hair, sex appeal, etc.. Hope discovers an abandoned ship, sets off to recover more beer, and captures a Japanese submarine. And so forth.
If Fields had engaged in these adventures, he would have found a way to do it visually. Remember the scene in "Never Give a Sucker an Even Break," in which he drops his bottle of booze out of an airplane, and unhesitatingly dives overboard after it?
"By contrast, Hope doesnt even provide a funny drinking scene in his movie, although the materials for one several thousand cans of beer are all around."
Given the choice, he always prefers verbal to visual humor, and this gives his films a slower pace than the comedies now in fashion. Again and again, we watch Hope in close-up while he snaps off a one-liner.
Some of his material is terribly familiar by now. "We\re safe," he tells his buddies. "There\s a Crosby double feature in camp tonight, so the commander will be asleep."
Still, "Private Navy" is an improvement over Hope\s recent "
Eight on the Lam
" Perhaps that\s because of a tighter story line, quicker direction by
Frank Tashlin
and a sparkling supporting performance by the Japanese actor Mako. He was splendid as the engine room coolie in "The Sand Pebbles," but this is the only performance I\ve seen by him since. I\d like to see more.

The Talented Mr. Ripley 1999 Cast
Matt Damon as Tom Ripley
Gwyneth Paltrow as Marge Sherwood
Jude Law as Dickie Greenleaf
Cate Blanchett as Meredith Logue
Philip Seymour Hoffman as Freddie Miles
Jack Davenport as Peter Smith-Kingsley
Written and Directed by Anthony Minghella
Based On The Novel by Patricia Highsmith
Crime, Drama, Thriller Rated R
For Violence, Language and Brief Nudity 140 minutes
"Villains usually last through only one crime novel, while heroes are good for a whole series. Thats a great inconvenience for their authors, because villains are usually more colorful than heroes. Patricia Highsmiths novels about Tom Ripley are the exception, a series of books about a man who is irredeemably bad, and yet charming, intelligent and thoughtful about the price he pays for his amoral lifestyle."
"The Talented Mr. Ripley, her first Ripley novel, published in 1955, shows Ripley in the process of inventing himself and finding his lifes work. He was a poor man who wanted to be a rich man, an unknown man who wanted not to be famous but simply to be someone else. Some men are envious of other mens cars, or wives, or fortunes. Ripley coveted their identities."
The novel shows him annexing the life and identity of a man named Greenleaf. It was filmed in 1960 by
Rene Clement
as "
Purple Noon
," with
Alain Delon
as Ripley, and now it has been filmed again by
Anthony Minghella
"
The English Patient
", with
Matt Damon
"in the title role. One of the pleasures of the two adaptations is that the plots are sufficiently different that you can watch one without knowing how the other turns out--or even what happens along the way. That despite the fact that they both revolve around Ripleys decision that he can be Greenleaf as well as, or better than, Greenleaf can be himself."
"Purple Noon" begins with the two men already friends. "The Talented Mr. Ripley," adapted by Minghella, has a better idea: Ripley is an opportunist who stumbles onto an opening into Greenleaf\s life, and takes it. He borrows a Princeton blazer to play the piano at a rooftop party in Manhattan and a rich couple assume he must have known their son Dickie at Princeton. He agrees.
The Greenleafs are concerned about Dickie 
Jude Law
", who has decamped to the decadence of Europe and shows no sign of coming home. They offer Tom Ripley a deal: Theyll finance his own trip to Europe and pay him $1,000 if he returns with their son. Cut to a beach in Italy, where Dickie suns with Marge Sherwood "
Gwyneth Paltrow
, and the original deception turns evil.
Remember that Ripley is already impersonating someone--Dickie\s old Princeton friend. That works with Dickie "I\ve completely forgotten him," he tells Marge, but eventually he wonders if anything Tom tells him is the truth. Ripley, at this point still developing the skills that will carry him through several more adventures, instinctively knows that the best way to lie is to admit to lying, and to tell the truth whenever convenient.
When Dickie asks him what his talents are, he replies, "Forging signatures, telling lies and impersonating almost anyone." Quite true. And then he does a chilling impersonation of Mr. Greenleaf asking him to bring Dickie back to the United States. "I feel like he\s here," Dickie says, as Tom does his father\s voice.
By confessing his mission, Tom disarms Dickie and is soon accepted into his circle, which also includes an epicurean friend named Freddie Miles 
Philip Seymour Hoffman
. Also moving through Europe at about the same time is a rich girl named Meredith Logue 
Cate Blanchett
, who believes things about Tom that Dickie must not be allowed to know. But I am growing vague, and must grow vaguer, because the whole point of the movie is to show Tom Ripley learning to use subterfuge, improvisation and lightning-fast thinking under pressure to become Dickie Greenleaf.
Highsmith wrote The Talented Mr. Ripley five years after writing "
Strangers on a Train
" \xa0which Hitchcock made into a film he sometimes called his favorite. The two stories are similar. Strangers is about a man who meets another man and offers to trade crimes with him: I\ll kill the person you hate, and you kill the person I hate, and since neither one of us has any connection with our victim or any motive for killing him, we\ll never be caught. Talented has Dickie blamed for the drowning death of a local woman and Ripley "trading" that death as a cover-up for another.
"Hitchcocks film subtly suggested a homosexual feeling in the instigator, and Tom Ripley also seems to have feelings for Dickie Greenleaf--although narcissism and sexuality are so mixed up in his mind that Ripley almost seems to want to become Greenleaf so that he can love himself both Ripley movies have a scene of Ripley dressed in Dickies clothes and posing in a mirror. This undercurrent is wisely never brought up to the level of conscious action because so many of Tom Ripleys complicated needs and desires are deeply buried; he finds out what he wants to do by doing it."
"Matt Damon is bland and ordinary as Ripley, and then takes on the vivid coloration of others--even a jazz singer. Jude Law makes Dickie almost deserving of his fate because of the way he adopts new friends and then discards them. Gwyneth Paltrows role is tricky: Yes, Dickie is her boyfriend, but hes cold and treats her badly, and there are times when she would intuit the dread secret if she werent so distracted by the way she already resents Dickie."
"The movie is an intelligent a thriller as youll see this year. It is also insidious in the way it leads us to identify with Tom Ripley. He is the protagonist, we see everything through his eyes, and Dickie is not especially lovable; that means we are a co-conspirator in situations where it seems inconceivable that Toms deception will not be discovered. Hes a monster, but we want him to get away with it. There is one sequence in the film involving an apartment, a landlady, the police and a friend who knows the real Dickie that depends on such meticulous timing and improvisation that if you made it speedier, youd have the Marx Brothers."

American Gun 2006 Cast
Donald Sutherland as Carl
Forest Whitaker as Carter
Marcia Gay Harden as Janet
Linda Cardellini as Mary-Anne
Tony Goldwyn as Frank
Chris Marquette as David
Nikki Reed as Tally
Arlen Escarpeta as Jay
Written by Aric Avelino
Steven Bagatourian Drama, Indie
Rated R for violence content and language
95 minutes "American Gun" tells three stories that are small, even quiet. The stories are not strident but sad, and one of them is open-ended. They are about people who find that guns in the hands of others have made their own lives almost impossible to live.
The first story involves a mother named Janet, played by
Marcia Gay Harden
, whose son shot and killed other students at his Oregon high school three years ago, and then was shot dead. She carries on with her remaining son, David 
Chris Marquette
", who attends a private school. She needs money. She agrees to a paid interview with a local television station, during which she seems inarticulate about her older sons rampage. Well, what can she say? Like other parents, she lost a child in the shooting. Perhaps it is harder to be the parent of a killer than the parent of a victim. Then David has to leave the private school and enroll in the very same school where his brother did the shooting."
Also interviewed is a cop 
Tony Goldwyn
 who some people feel should have been able to save lives that day. He knows he followed department procedures, but feels blamed for the deaths. Both the mother and the cop are at a loss for words when TV reporters ask them questions beginning with "How does it make you feel?" They\re not glib and don\t fall easily into the cliches of remorse and redemption.
The second story stars
Forest Whitaker
as Carter, the principal of an inner-city high school in Chicago. He moved to the big city from Ohio, thinking he could make a difference, but now his wife 
Garcelle Beauvais-Nilon
 feels she is losing him to his job. He is discouraged, weary beyond belief, despairing. One of his honor students, Jay 
Arlen Escarpeta
", is found with a gun near the school, and faces expulsion. We follow Jay to his job inside a padlocked cashiers station at an all-night gas station, where any customer might confront him with a gun. He needs to carry a gun, he feels, for protection, even though it isnt loaded."
The third story, the open-ended one, involves a gentle old man named Carl 
Donald Sutherland
 who runs a gun shop in Charlottesville. His granddaughter Mary-Anne 
Linda Cardellini
 enrolls at the university and works part-time in the store. Carl is not a gun nut. He might as well be selling fishing tackle. Mary-Anne feels uneasy working in the store, however, and then one of her friends is assaulted.
All three stories ask the same question: How do you lead a reasonable life in a world where a lot of your fellow citizens can and do walk around armed? There seem to be two possible answers: They should be disarmed, or you should be armed. A third answer, implied by some gun owners, is that they should be armed but many other categories of people should not be. They never include themselves in those categories. I am reminded of my friend McHugh, who was shown a gun by a guy in a bar. "Why do you carry that?" McHugh asked him. "I live in a dangerous neighborhood," the guy said. "It would be safer," McHugh told him, "if you moved."
"At one point in the movie, the neighbors of Janet, the mother, observe the third anniversary of the high school massacre by planting flags on their laws, including a black flag on hers. They are vindictive and revengeful. Did it occur to them to plant signs asking for a ban on handguns? No. Guns dont kill people. Janets son does."
"American Gun" is a first feature by
Aric Avelino
, who co-wrote it with
Steven Bagatourian
. He shows an almost tender restraint in his story-telling, not pounding us with a message but simply looking steadily at how guns have made these lives difficult. The mother\s real answer to the TV interviewer could have been: "My son killed his schoolmates because he had a gun and he could." The Columbine shooters without weapons would still have been antisocial psychopaths, but they would not have been killers.
As for the Chicago school principal, his despair is easy to understand. During the same week I saw "American Gun," two children were shot dead in Chicago just as a byproduct of guns. They were not targets, but accidental victims. The cost of guns is multiplied day after day, year after year, body after body, in our society. The rest of the world looks on in wonder. The right to bear arms is being defended by the sacrifice of the lives of their victims. That doesn\t mean gun owners are all bad people. Donald Sutherland\s gun dealer seems like one of the nicest people you would ever want to meet. On the door of his store there is a sign: "We buy used guns." Just a sign. No big deal. It\s the final image in the movie.

"Whos The Man?  1993" Cast
Doctor Dre as Doctor Dre
Ed Lover as Ed Lover
Badja Djola as Lionel
Directed by Ted Demme
Rated R For Strong Language
90 minutes "Who\s the Man?" is a fresh, funny update of movies like "Cotton Comes to Harlem" - a comedy about a couple of very bad barbers who pass the police exam by accident, and turn out to be good at solving crimes. The movie stars long, tall
Ed Lover
and short, round
Doctor Dre
as characters with the same name, although to their friends they are "Before and After," and to crooks they look more like Abbott and Costello.
"As the movie opens, theyre partners on the last chair of a Harlem barbershop owned by Nick "
Jim Moody
", a neighborhood leader who has seen the block gradually taken over by dope dealers, who are themselves being replaced by real estate speculators. To Lover and Dre, these are not pressing concerns; theyre more interested in inventing bizarre new hairstyles which they claim to have seen on famous former clients."
"Nick finally has to fire them; theyre getting so many complaints that none of the customers will let them anywhere near their hair. Nicks better idea: They should take the police exam."
It\s a multiple choice, which they both take by spelling "abacadaba"  in the a-b-c-d spaces. They pass, to their amazement, and become the two most inept recruits in the history of the force.
The movie was directed by
Ted Demme
nephew of Jonathan, and has a sharp look and feel; there\s a good ear for dialogue, a nice comic rhythm, and performances by Lover and Dre hosts of "Yo! MTV Raps" which could quite possibly make them into a movie comedy team. The film seems ripe for sequels.
Most of the humor grows out of human nature. There\s a funny running gag involving a duty sergeant\s determination to keep Dr. Dre from ever eating another doughnut, and another feud involving the sergeant\s refusal to call anyone "Doctor" unless he has a medical degree. I also enjoyed the gags after the cops take their beaten-up squad car into a storefront customizing shop, where it\s turned into a street rod, with surprising results for the next cops who drive it.
"Beneath the humor, though, is an undercurrent of seriousness, mostly represented by the character of Nick, whose barber shop represents continuity and responsibility on a street where drugs are taking over. In one scene, he threatens a drug dealer while reminding him that he gave him haircuts when he was a little boy. In another, he warns local residents that gentrification can be a danger, as neighborhoods grow too expensive for the present inhabitants. The movies bad guy is a developer who is trying to run Nick out and buy up the entire neighborhood - although perhaps not in order to build the condos he keeps talking about."
"Seth Greenlands screenplay includes a running commentary on countless television shows did"
Redd Foxx
actually fake his own death to outsmart the IRS?, and there\s a payoff at the end inspired by "
The Beverly Hillbillies
." A lot of the humor, though, seems to spring from the personalities and relationships of Dr. Dre and Ed Lover themselves, who, like Cheech and Chong and Laurel and Hardy and the teams mentioned in the movie, have an easy chemistry. My notion is that "Who\s the Man?" could turn out to be a star-maker.

The Abduction 1975 Cast
Judith-Marie Bergan as Patricia Prescott
Andrew Rohrer as Michael
Leif Erickson as Father
Dorothy Malone as Mother
Crime, Drama, Thriller 95 minutes
Not long after Patty Hearst was kidnapped, zealous researchers into the case unearthed an obscure porno novel named "Black Abductor," by Harrison James. It had appeared briefly on the paperback racks of adult bookstores a few years earlier, and then seemed destined for a well-deserved oblivion. But it was resurrected during the Hearst disappearance because certain events in the book and in real life had an almost uncanny similarity to each other.
Had Patty\s SLA kidnappers read the book? Was this trashy novel the scenario for the most sensational and interminable- story of the year? Well, whatever it was, it was a gold mine - because by buying the rights, to a novel published before the kidnapping, filmmakers could make a movie that came fairly close to the facts of the Hearst case without risking libel. And that\s what "Abduction" is: a movie that comes fairly close to the facts, but leaves us almost totally unsatisfied - if, at this late date, we still have any curiosity about why Patty joined, or seemed to join, the SLA.
"Some of the early scenes are out of Patty folklore: Shes making out with her boy friend in their apartment when the kidnappers burst in, the radicals force her to make recorded statements, the boy friend is rebuffed in his attempts to win the confidence of Pattys father. Other stuff is played fairly free and loose."
The father, for example, isn\t a newspaper publisher but a nefarious figure who takes public money to build "low-income housing" and actually builds high-rental units instead. He has a set of strange mental hang-ups, unspecified, which cause him to look for hours at a videotape of his daughter being raped. His wife played by none other than
Dorothy Malone
 is given over mostly to fits of trembling. The FBI is portrayed as experts in intimidation, the cops are either dumb or unlucky and the radical groups, politics boil down to "violence is the only way to change the system."
"Meanwhile, Patty begins to identify with her captors, mostly because they mistreat her. She has sexual fantasies that the kidnap situation apparently plays into, and by the end of the movie, shes a cop-killer. No real attempt is made to explain Pattys conversion. We have to take it on faith, which, given the large number of sex scenes during which it occurs, the audience was mostly willing to do. Maybe if this movie had come out a year ago, or been a little better, or . . . well, by now who really cares?"

The Coca-Cola Kid 1985 Cast
Eric Roberts as Becker
Greta Scacchi as Terri
Bill Kerr as T. George
Chris Haywood as Kim
Kris McQuade as Juliana
Directed by Dusan Makavejev
Produced by David Roe
Screenplay by Frank Moorhouse
Photographed by Dean Semler
Music by William Motzing
Comedy, Foreign Rated NR
98 minutes "Give me churches," the man from Atlanta says. Little symbols appear on the computer screen. "Schools." More symbols. "Taverns." Lots more symbols.
"You see," the man said, "I knew there had to be people there."
The reason for his confusion is very simple. He is a troubleshooter from Coca-Cola headquarters in Atlanta, and he is looking at the statistics for a district in Australia where absolutely no Coca-Cola is consumed. Not one drop. He has been sent all the way from America to find out why.
That\s the opening dilemma of Dusan Makavejev\s "The Coca-Cola Kid," an oddball comedy that is particularly well-timed to coincide with the current Coke marketing circus.
The movie stars
Eric Roberts
, the demented killer from "
Star 80
," as the American Coke expert, and one of the movie\s incidental oddities is that Roberts seems just as obsessed in this role as he did as a killer. He brings such a murderous intensity to marketing that he seems a lot like the marketing people I know.
"It doesnt take him long to discover the reason for Cokes problems in Australia. The folks in that isolated district dont drink Coke because they prefer a local soda pop manufactured in a steam-powered plant by an eccentric named T. George McDowell "
Bill Kerr
. Roberts spies on T. George, and maps a giant public relations campaign that includes an appearance at the local Rotary Club. Meanwhile, at regional Coke headquarters, he is pursued by a weird and beautiful young girl 
Greta Scacchi
", who has a secret: She is T. Georges daughter."
The movie unwinds in an unpredictable fashion, which is Makavejev\s trademark. From his early films like "
Innocence Unprotected
" through such controversial episodes as "
Sweet Movie
" and "
WR: Mysteries of the Organism
" to his 1983 hit "
Montenegro
," Makavejev always has used a cheerful juxtaposition of sex, violence and politics.
"The Coca-Cola Kid" is light on violence and the politics are implied rather than stated Coke represents American imperialism, I think. But the sex is accompanied by the usual Makavejev trademark, an interest in textures.
In "Sweet Movie," sex took place on giant mountains of sugar. This time, Scacchi dresses in a red-and-white Santa suit, and tries to seduce Roberts in a flurry of feathers.
"The movie is filled with moments of inspiration, of which the most unforgettable include an Aborigine Coke commercial; Scacchi creeping about the office and hiding in a Coke cooler, and T. Georges final solution for his steam-powered soda factory."
"The last half of the film, alas, does not quite deliver on the promises of the first half, perhaps because Eric Roberts performance is so intense and mannered that he eventually seems to be sliding off into another level of existence. He never really connects with Scacchi, so we dont know how they feel about each other, and therefore we cant track the progress of their relationship."
"The movie has so many other delights, though, that its fun anyway. Maybe it wasnt exactly intended to be a love story."

Seeking a Friend for the End of the World 2012 Cast
Steve Carell as Dodge
Nancy Carell as Linda
Keira Knightley as Penny
Rob Corddry as Warren
Patton Oswalt as Roache
Derek Luke as Speck
Written and directed by Lorene Scafaria
Comedy, Drama, Romance, Science Fiction Rated R
for language including sexual references, some drug use and brief violence 101 minutes
If he were told the world were ending tomorrow, Martin Luther once said, he would plant a tree.
Werner Herzog
would start a film. In "Seeking a Friend for the End of the World,"
Steve Carell
"plays an insurance salesman but finds little point in selling a whole-life policy. An asteroid 70 miles wide is on a collision path with Earth, and governments have announced it will slam into its target in three weeks time."
"To me, even worse than this catastrophe would be foreknowledge of it. To die is one thing. How much worse to know that all the life that ever existed on this planet, and all it ever achieved, was to be obliterated? Dodge Carell looks a little gloomy at the best of times. Now life is really piling on. A space-shuttle mission to destroy the asteroid has failed, and to make things worse, Dodges wife has walked out on him and joined the man she really loves."
The end of the world is hardly a rare subject for movies; recently we\ve had "
Melancholia
" and "
Another Earth
," and who could forget Don McKellar\s bittersweet "
Last Night
" 1998?
Lorene Scafaria
, the writer-director of this film, approaches the subject as an opportunity for melancholy satire and some gentle romance. It amounts to sort of a romanic comedy, although it makes no promises of providing a happy ending.
"Some people riot in the streets. There are looters, determined to have a new big-screen TV, no matter how few days are left to watch it. There are orgies and mass baptisms. Cable news inevitably attaches a catchphrase and some theme music to the apocalypse. Radio stations have countdowns. Dodge, alone and lonely in his apartment, unexpectedly finds himself caring for a dog. Thats when I realized what I would do if I knew the world was ending. I would find a homeless mother dog with puppies and be calmed by her optimism."
Dodge meets Penny 
Keira Knightley
", a woman who lives in the next building. They begin to talk and become kindred spirits. She talks him into a road trip that would bring together two of their desires. He can look for the girl hes always thought he should have married, and she can seek her family."
"The destination of this trip isnt really the point. Road trips are about who you meet along the way. They meet a man "
William Petersen
 who has hired a contract killer to shoot him and a survivalist 
Derek Luke
" who unreasonably believes all of his preparations will help him, and they come across a chain restaurant named Chippers. The shtick at this place is that the staff are all your best friends. The approaching Armageddon has cranked this routine into high gear, and everybody in the place is so desperately friendly, it borders on madness."
"How do you end a movie like this? I mean, before the inevitable end, which logically must be a blank screen? How does Scafaria as a filmmaker create a third act? She produces a couple of unexpected characters who inspire some moments of truth, and there is a Hemingwayesque flight in a small aircraft that is supposed, I guess, to indicate that we face the worst with stoic endurance. These scenes are good enough in themselves, but arent really adequate to bring a sense of closure."
"The best parts of this sweet film involve the middle stretches, when time, however limited, reaches ahead, and the characters do what they can to prevail in the face of calamity. How can I complain that they dont entirely succeed? Isnt the dilemma of the plot the essential dilemma of life?"

Snow White and the Huntsman 2012 Cast
Kristen Stewart as Snow White
Charlize Theron as Queen
Chris Hemsworth as Eric
Sam Claflin as William
Directed by Rupert Sanders
Written by Evan Daugherty
John Lee Hancock Hossein Amini
Action, Adventure, Drama, Fantasy Rated PG13
for intense sequences of violence and action, and brief sensuality 127 minutes
"Snow White and the Huntsman" reinvents the legendary story in a film of astonishing beauty and imagination. It\s the last thing you would expect from a picture with this title. It falters in its storytelling, because Snow White must be entirely good, the Queen must be entirely bad, and there\s no room for nuance. The end is therefore predetermined. But, oh, what a ride.
This is an older Snow White than we usually think of. Played for most of the film by
Kristen Stewart
", capable and plucky, she has spent long years locked in a room of her late fathers castle, imprisoned by his cruel second wife "
Charlize Theron
". When she escapes and sets about righting wrongs, she is a mature young woman, of interest to the two young men who join in her mission. But the movie sidesteps scenes of romance, and in a way, I suppose thats wise."
The Huntsman 
Chris Hemsworth
 is a heroic, mead-guzzling hunter assigned by the Queen to track down Snow White and bring her back to the castle. After encountering her, however, he is so impressed he changes sides. There is also Prince William 
Sam Claflin
, smitten since childhood, and the two men join in an unstated alliance.
The Queen lives in terror of losing the beauty of her youth and constantly tops up with the blood of virgins to restore it. She tests her success with the proverbial mirror on the wall, which melts into molten metal and assumes a spectral form, not unlike Death in "
The Seventh Seal
," although its metallic transformation process reminds us of "The Terminator."
The castle, which sits in eerie splendor on an island joined to the mainland only at low tide, is a gothic fantasy that reminds me of the Ghormenghast series. The Queen is joined there by her brother, somewhat diminished by his blond page-boy haircut, who does her bidding but seems rather out to lunch. Extras appear when needed, then disappear. The Queen commands extraordinary supernatural powers, including the ability to materialize countless black birds that can morph into fighting demons or shards of cutting metal.
All of this is rendered appropriately by the special effects, but the treasure of this film is in two of its locations: a harsh, forbidding Dark Forest, and an enchanted fairyland. Both of these realms exist near the castle, and the Huntsman is enlisted in the first place because he knows the Dark Forest, where Snow White has taken refuge.
In this forbidding realm, nothing lives, and it is thick with the blackened bones of dead trees, as if a forest fire had burned only the greenery. There is no cheer here and a monstrous troll confronts Snow White in a dramatic stare-down. After the Huntsman frees her from the Dark Forest, they are delighted to find, or be found by, the Eight Dwarves.
"Yes, eight, although one doesnt survive, reducing their number to the proverbial seven. These characters look strangely familiar, and no wonder: The magic of CGI has provided the faces of familiar British actors such as"
Ian McShane
,
Bob Hoskins
,
Ray Winstone
,
Nick Frost
,
Eddie Marsan
and
Toby Jones
". While this technique is effective, it nevertheless deprives eight working real dwarves with jobs, which isnt really fair."
"The dwarves lead them to my favorite realm in the film, an enchanting fairyland, which is a triumph of art direction and CGI. Mushrooms open their eyes and regard the visitors. Cute forest animals scamper and gambol in tribute to a forest scene in Disneys 1937 animated film. The fairies themselves are naked, pale-skinned sprites with old, wise faces. The spirit of this forest is embodied by a great white stag with expressive eyes and horns that spread in awesome complexity. This is a wonderful scene. The director,"
Rupert Sanders
, who began in TV commercials, is clearly familiar with establishing memorable places.
As for the rest, there is a sufficiency of medieval battle scenes, too many for my taste, and a fairly exciting siege of the castle, aided by the intervention of the dwarves, and featuring catapults that hurl globes of burning tar — always enjoyable.
There is a great film here somewhere, perhaps one that allowed greater complexity for the characters. But considering that I walked in expecting no complexity at all, let alone the visual wonderments, "Snow White and the Huntsman" is a considerable experience.

Sphere 1998 Cast
Dustin Hoffman as Norman Hoffman
Sharon Stone as Beth Halperin
Samuel L. Jackson as Harry Adams
Peter Coyote as Barnes
Liev Schreiber as Ted Fielding
Directed by Barry Levinson
Screenplay by Stephan Hauser
Paul Attanasio Based On A Novel by
Michael Crichton Drama, Horror, Mystery, Science Fiction, Thriller
Rated PG-13 For Sci-Fi Action Including Some Startling Images
132 minutes Michael Crichton
"is the science-fiction author that people read\rif they think theyre too good for “regular” science fiction. Too bad. What\rthey get in the film version of “Sphere,” directed by"
Barry Levinson
, is a watered-down\rtake on the sci-fi classic Solaris, by
Stanislaw Lem
, which was made into an\rimmeasurably better film by
Andrei Tarkovsky
.
"The underlying idea is the same: Humans come in contact with an\rextraterrestrial presence that makes their fears seem real. The earlier novel\rand film challenged our ideas about human consciousness. “Sphere” functions\rmore like a whodunit in which the plots hot potato is tossed from character to\rcharacter."
As the movie opens, an expert team is brought to the middle of\rthe Pacific, where an amazing thing has been found on the ocean floor: a giant\rspacecraft, apparently buried for nearly 300 years, that still emits a distant\rhum--suggesting it is intact and may harbor life. The members of the team: a\rpsychologist 
Dustin Hoffman
, a mathematician 
Samuel L. Jackson
, a\rbiochemist 
Sharon Stone
 and an astrophysicist 
Liev Schreiber
. In command of\ra Navy “habitat” on the ocean floor, next to the ship, is
Peter Coyote
". The\rhabitats small crew includes radio operator"
Queen Latifah
, from “
Set It Off
",”\rwho is on hand to illustrate Hollywoods immutable law that the first character\rto die is always the African American."
"The descent to the ocean floor, accompanied by much talk about\rdepressurization, will be a disappointment to anyone who remembers the suspense\rin similar scenes in James Camerons “Abyss.” And the introduction of the\rspacecraft is also a disappointment: Instead of the awe-inspiring first\rglimpses we remember from “Close Encounters” or even “"
Independence Day
",” its a\rthrowaway. No wonder. The ocean-floor special effects are less than\rsensational, and the exteriors of the descent craft and the spacecraft are all\rtoo obviously models."
"No matter, if the story holds our attention. At first it does.\rAs long as were in suspense, were involved, because we anticipate great\rthings. But “Sphere” is one of those movies where the end titles should be\rPeggy Lee singing “Is That All There Is?” The more the plot reveals, the more\rwe realize how little there is to reveal, until finally the movie disintegrates\rinto flaccid scenes where the surviving characters sit around talking about\rtheir puzzlements."
"I have been careful to protect most of the films secrets. I can\rbe excused, I suppose, for revealing that what they find inside the spacecraft\ris, yes, a sphere. Where does this sphere come from? Who or what made it? How\rdoes it function? I am content to let it remain a mystery, so long as it\rentertains me, but after a promising start it generates a “2001-style” hurtle through\rspace and time it just sits there, glowing and glowering, while the humans\rdeal with the dangers of undersea life."
Hoffman, Jackson, Stone: These are good actors. How good is\rillustrated by how much they do with the flat, unyielding material. The last 20\rminutes of the film are a slog through circular explanations and speculations\rthat would have capsized lesser actors. They give it a good try, with dialogue\rthat sounds either like characters analyzing the situation, or actors trying to\rfigure out the plot.
“Sphere” feels rushed. The screenplay uses lots of talk to\rconceal the fact that the story has never been grappled with. The effects and\rthe sets are pitched at the level of made-for-TV fare. The only excellence is\rin the acting, and even then the screenplay puts the characters through so many\rU-turns that dramatic momentum is impossible.
"There are ideas sloshing around somewhere in the rising waters\raboard the undersea habitat. The best one is an old science-fiction standby:\rAre humans mature enough to handle the secrets of the universe? Or are we but\ran infant species, whose fears and phobias prevent us from embracing the big\rpicture? The last scenes are supposed to be a solemn confrontation of these\rquestions, but theyre punctuated by a special-effects shot so puny and\runderwhelming that the spell is broken."
"Thats all, folks. Put your hands together for Miss Peggy Lee."

Love and Death 1975 Cast
Woody Allen as Boris
Yves Barsaca as Rimsky
Diane Keaton as Sonia
Feodor Atkine as Mikhall
James Tolkan as Napoleon
Written by Woody Allen
Produced by Charles H. Joffe
Photographed by Ghislain Cloquet
Music by Prokoflev
Edited by Ralph Rosenblum
Comedy Rated PG
85 minutes "All men live under a sentence of death. They all go sooner or later. But Im different. I have to go at 6 a.m. tomorrow morning. It would have been 5, but I had a good lawyer..."
So muses
Woody Allen
, in the character of a peasant named Boris, at the beginning of "Love and Death." The quotation serves as an illustration of the film\s strategy, which is to juxtapose serious matters with a cheerful comic anarchy. Sometimes that\s just a case of setting up a portentous situation and attacking it with a punch line, but Allen frequently finds a way to make his point visually, and "Love and Death" is his most ambitious experiment with the comic possibilities of film.
That\s not to say Woody isn\t still largely a verbal comedian, because he is, and one of the movie\s running gags is an interminable debate about the philosophical and moral choices offered the characters at every turn. But "Love and Death" has been mapped out as a fully thought-through film. It\s a lot more mature than the anything-goes style of earlier Allen movies like "Bananas."
Allen\s premise is a simple one. Imagine the basic Woody Allen character -- shy, incompetent, totally fascinated by women and scared to death of them, secretly romantic -- and put him in a time warp that leads back to Russia at the time of Napoleon. Give him a childhood encounter with Death who looks, of course, as he did in "
The Seventh Seal
" and give him a question for Death: "What\s it like after you die? Are there any girls?" Raise him to be a "militant coward," draft him and send him off to fight the French, and then marry him to a beautiful girl who takes pity on him because she hopes he will be shot dead in a duel.
Allen moves through this material like an upside-down bookmark through "
War and Peace
." There\s cannon to the left of him, cannon to the right of him and, inevitably, cannon all around him, because to hide on the battlefield, he\s crawled into a cannon. The cannon goes off, Woody becomes a human projectile who destroys four generals without, miraculously, being scratched himself, and he returns as a hero and makes love to the beautiful Countess Alexandrovna. "You are a great lover!" she declares "Thanks," he says. "I practice a lot when I\m alone."
"The movies funniest sequence comes after he marries the beautiful Sonia "
Diane Keaton
 and together they set out to impersonate Spanish nobility and assassinate Napoleon. This leads to a scene in which Allen konks Keaton on the head several times in a hilarious steal from Chaplin, and then to an encounter in a boudoir when Allen is paralyzed by yet another moral crisis.
If
Mel Brooks
tries usually succeeding to keep us laughing at any cost, Woody Allen takes a quieter approach. We begin to like his screen persona. He\s sweet, he wants to do the right thing, he represents the possibility that simplicity still can prevail in the world. And he\s a perfect foil for the Diane Keaton character, who always wants every situation both ways, plus options. Miss Keaton is very good in "Love and Death," perhaps because here she gets to establish and develop a character, instead of just providing a foil, as she\s often done in other Allen films.
The best parts of "Love and Death" shouldn\t, of course, be revealed here. Comedy\s hard to review for that reason. You don\t want to give away the laughs and yet you\re left with little else to talk about. Perhaps I should just point to the acting skill that Allen and Miss Keaton exhibit. There are dozens of little moments when their looks have to be exactly right, and they almost always are. There are shadings of comic meaning that could have gotten lost if all we had were the words, and there are whole scenes that play off facial expressions. It\s a good movie to watch just for that reason, because it\s been done with such care, love and lunacy.

Pumpkin 2002 Cast
Christina Ricci as Carolyn McDuffy
Hank Harris as Romanoff
Brenda Blethyn as Judy Romanoff
Dominique Swain as Jeanine Kryszinsky
Marisa Coughlan as Julie Thurber
Sam Ball as Kent Woodlands
Harry J. Lennix as Robert Meary
Directed by Anthony Abrams
Adam Larson Broder Writte by
Adam Larson Broder Comedy, Drama, Indie, Romance
Rated R For Language and A Scene Of Sexuality
113 minutes "Pumpkin" defies description. Maybe it doesn\t need a category, it needs a diagnosis. Relentlessly, and sometimes brilliantly, it forces us to decide what we really think, how permissive our taste really is, how far a black comedy can go before it goes too far. It\s like a teenage sex comedy crossed with the darkest corners of underground comics. We laugh in three ways: with humor, with recognition and with disbelief.
The film stars
Christina Ricci
as Carolyn McDuffy, the peppiest member of a sorority house that dreams of being named Sorority of the Year. To get extra points, the house arranges to coach "special people"--handicapped and retarded athletes--and all of the girls are lined up eagerly when the buses arrive with their tutorial victims. One of them is Pumpkin Romanoff 
Hank Harris
", who seems to be both mentally and physically challenged, although the movie refuses to permit a verdict about his intelligence level. At first Carolyn is too awkward and embarrassed to deal with Pumpkin--everything she says seems to be offensive--but then she finds she cant get him out of her mind. Pumpkin of course has fallen instantly into love with her."
Carolyn has a boyfriend, a BMOC and tennis champion named Kent Woodlands 
Sam Ball
", who in his own way is also handicapped: Hes too handsome, with the improbable good looks of a silent-screen idol. But she begins to spend more time with Pumpkin, who at first seems ill-equipped for his chosen sport of discus throwing he cant stand or throw but works out tirelessly in his backyard to get in shape."
"Pumpkins mother, Judy "
Brenda Blethyn
", is an alcoholic who coddles her son and then puts him down. She sees Carolyn as a threat, and when she finds the two in bed together she calls her a slut and a pedophile. This raises an interesting point, since Pumpkin is apparently about 15 or 16, but sex between older women and younger men seems permitted in the movies even though its taboo the other way around."
Carolyn eventually begins to see the hypocrisy of the Greek system, the shallowness of Kent and the truly special qualities of Pumpkin. Yes, and there is even a scene where Pumpkin gets an ovation for a discus throw. But this is not one of those heartwarming stories about overcoming obstacles. "Pumpkin" creates inspirational moments, only to undermine them, and doubts all good motives. Consider the way the sororities compete for the black and Filipino girls who are going through rush, because they want to add "diversity," and besides, the Filipino "looks almost white." Consider the way Carolyn\s Asian sorority sister, Anne Chung 
Michelle Krusiec
, is never referred to without the word "even" in front of her name: "You can go to the prom with any of the sisters," sorority president Julie 
Marisa Coughlan
 tells Kent. "Even Anne Chung." The movie takes side shots at other campus targets. Carolyn takes a poetry workshop taught by a black professor 
Harry J. Lennix
, who announces poetry cannot be taught and that he hates to grade papers, but that, not to worry, "you\ll get your stupid credit." Carolyn composes for this class an "Ode to Pasadena" that must be heard to be believed. When she decides to take a stand and leave school, she announces she\ll go to "community college," only to discover she has too many credits and has to settle for Long Beach Tech. In her rooming house at Long Beach, the students eat beans, not lamb chops, her favorite at the sorority house.
The climax of the movie involves a fight between Pumpkin and Kent that goes beyond the usual boundaries of commercial comedies, and a car crash that is a deliberate exercise in mocking special effects and stunt explosions. Everything in the movie mocks itself. Even the last shot calls Carolyn\s final sincerity into question. But I can say this: "Pumpkin" is alive, and takes chances, and uses the wicked blade of satire in order to show up the complacent political correctness of other movies in its campus genre. It refuses to play it safe. And there is courage in the performances--for example, in the way Sam Ball deals with what happens to his character. Or in the way Ricci sails fearlessly into the risky material. "Pumpkin" may make you mad, but at least you\re not angry because it wasn\t trying.

Anchorman: The Legend of Ron Burgundy 2004 Cast
Will Ferrell as Ron Burgundy
Christina Applegate as Veronica Corningstone
David Koechner as Champ Kind
Steven Carell as Brick Tamland
Paul Rudd as Brian Fantana
Fred Willard as Ed Harken
Chris Parnell as Garth Holliday
Directed by Adam McKay
Written by Will Ferrell
McKay Comedy
Rated PG-13 for sexual humor, language and comic violence
94 minutes Sometimes the key to satire is to stay fairly close to the source. "Anchorman," like "This Is Spinal Tap," works best when it\s only a degree or two removed from the excesses of the real thing. When the news director goes ape over stories about cute animals at the zoo, when the promos make the news "team" look like a happy family, the movie is right on target. But when rival local news teams engage in what looks like a free-for-all from a Roman arena, it doesn\t work. Most of the time, though, "Anchorman" works, and a lot of the time it\s very funny.
The movie centers on Ron Burgundy 
Will Ferrell
, the legendary top local anchor in San Diego in the early 1970s. Ron has bought into his legend, believes his promos, and informs a blonde at a pool party: "I have many very important leather-bound books, and my apartment smells of rich mahogany." His weakness is that he will read anything that is typed into his prompter. Anything. The words pass from his eyes into his mouth without passing through his brain.
"There are viewers in every city who will think they know who this character in based on. Certainly anyone who was around Chicago TV news in the 1970s will instantly think of one name. I will not reveal the name here, but I will tell a story. A friend of mine was an assignment editor on this nameless anchors station. One day he gave a juicy assignment to the mans co-anchor and rival. The next day the nameless one leaned casually against my friends door:"
"Say, John, that was a great story you had for Maury yesterday. What do you have for me today?"
"
Contempt
."
True story. "Anchorman" also shows promotional spots in which Burgundy and his news teammates smile at each other lots and lots. Last week Richard Roeper and I reviewed promos at PROMAX, the annual convention of TV promotion people. One spot showed the members of a news team doing magic tricks, performing with a Hula Hoop, playing a ukulele, etc. Yes, it was intended to be funny. And it was funny, especially if that\s how you want to think of the people you trust for your news.
As "Anchorman" opens, Ron Burgundy faces a crisis. Ed Harke, the stations news director, played by the invaluable
Fred Willard
, wants to add "diversity" to the newsroom by hiring a woman -- no, a WOMAN! -- as Burgundy\s co-anchor. This cannot be. It is not right. It is against nature. Burgundy is appalled. The new co-anchor will be the efficiently named Veronica Corningstone 
Christina Applegate
, and yes, reader, she was the blonde that Burgundy tried to pick up with the leather and mahogany line.
The other news team members include the wonderfully named Champ Kind 
David Koechner
, Brick Tamland 
Steven Carell
 and Brian Fantana 
Paul Rudd
. And yes, sometimes when they\re together, they actually do sing "Afternoon Delight." They are united in their fear of adding a woman to the team. "I read somewhere," one of them ominously warns, "that their periods attract bears." Odors play an important role in the movie. Hoping to attract Corningstone, Brian Fantana splashes on a high-octane cologne that smells, the newsroom agrees, "like the time the raccoon got in the copier."
If the movie simply focused on making Ron and his team look ridiculous, it might grow tedious, because that would be such an easy thing to do. But it has a kind of sweetness to it. Despite his weaknesses, Ron is sort of a nice guy, darn it all, and Veronica Corningstone, despite her desire to project a serious image, kinda likes the guy -- especially when he reveals an unsuspected musical talent in a lounge one night, after he\s asked to "sit in on jazz flute."
"The movie contains a lot of cameo appearances by other stars of the current comedy movie tour. Their names I will not reveal. Well, a characters name I will reveal: An anchorman named Wes Mantooth is Burgundys arch-enemy. When the news teams clash in a free-for-all, its over the top. But a lot of the quieter moments of rivalry are on target. I have known and worked with a lot of anchorpersons, even female anchorpersons, over the years, and I can tell you that almost all of them are good people -- smart professionals who dont take themselves too seriously. But every once in a while you get a Ron Burgundy, and you kind of treasure him, because you can dine out on the stories for years."

Bogus 1996 Cast
Whoopi Goldberg as Harriet Franklin
Gerard Depardieu as Bogus
Haley Joel Osment as Albert
Denis Mercier as Mr. Antoine
Nancy Travis as Lorraine
Directed by Norman Jewison
Screenplay by Alvin Sargent
Based On A Story by Jeff Rothberg
Comedy, Family, Fantasy, Science Fiction Rated PG
For Thematic Elements and Some Mild Language 112 minutes
"“Bogus” tells the story of a little boy who is orphaned and then finds his life filled with two unconventional parent-substitutes. How unconventional? Theyre played by"
Whoopi Goldberg
and
Gerard Depardieu
--Goldberg as the aunt he never knew about, and Depardieu as an imaginary friend, a large, shambling Frenchman, who bounces out of the pages of a coloring book.
"The little boys name is Albert "
Haley Joel Osment
, and he has grown up in Las Vegas, where his mother 
Nancy Travis
 was an assistant in the magic act of Mr. Antoine 
Denis Mercier
, who seems to be a cross between
David Copperfield
"and Cirque du Soleil. Its not an ordinary childhood; he has a baseball autographed by"
Liza Minnelli
. After his mother is killed in a traffic accident, early in the film, Mr. Antoine and the other show-biz people meet to decide what is to be done with the child. But the mother has provided for that in her will, naming her African-American half-sister Harriet Goldberg, whom nobody knew about.
Harriet is not thrilled to be given responsibility for a kid. She runs a restaurant supply business out East, knows nothing of show biz and less about kids, and has a lot on her mind. But she accepts the responsibility because she must, and the morose little boy flies east to his destiny. It is then that Bogus materializes from the coloring book to become his sidekick, adviser and confidant.
This mixture of the poignant and the mystical is not new to director
Norman Jewison
, who in films like “
Moonstruck
” and “
Only You
,” found a winsome romanticism that bypasses the pragmatic side of life. Here he works with a story by
Alvin Sargent
that seems contrived from unlikely inspirations. It is not enough to provide Albert with Whoopi Goldberg as an aunt and Gerard Depardieu as an imaginary friend: The movie also must allow Harriet to see Bogus, too--and not just see him, but dance “The Continental” with him, in the unlikeliest pas de deux of our age.
"“Bogus” is light as a feather. Its a charming, inconsequential fantasy that sidesteps such matters as logic and motivation, and rightly so: This is the sort of beguiling fairy tale that needs as little reality as possible, and I thought it really took off after the aunt finally saw Bogus, too."
A few problems are provided in the third act, as when the homesick Albert travels all by himself to Atlantic City, where Mr. Antoine is performing, and of course there are manufactured moments when it seems the little boy is missing or lost. A crisis like that is necessary, I suppose, in order for there to be a happy ending.
"But essentially the movie is about the charm of the actors, especially Goldberg and Depardieu. And it adds still more wonder to the career of Depardieu, who increasingly seems to be costumed in giants overcoats and shirts made out of draperies. He is an unmade bed with a broken nose, and the biggest French star of his generation, which, in a way, is an even better trick than popping out of a coloring book."

Bang the Drum Slowly 1973 Drama
Rated PG 97 minutes
“Bang the Drum Slowly” is the ultimate baseball movie -- and, despite what a plot summary might suggest, I think it’s more about baseball than death. It takes place during the last season on this Earth of one Bruce Pearson, an earnest but dumb catcher from Georgia who learns, in the movie’s first scene, that he is suffering from an incurable disease. The movie is about that season and about his friendship with Henry Wiggen, a pitcher, who undertakes to see that Bruce at least lives his last months with some dignity, some joy, and a few good games.
On the surface, then, the movie seems a little like “Brian’s Song”. But it’s not: It’s mostly about baseball and the daily life of a major league club on the road. The fact of Bruce’s approaching death adds a poignancy to the season, but “Bang the Drum Slowly” doesn’t brood about death and it isn’t morbid. In its mixture of fatalism, roughness, tenderness, and bleak humor, indeed, it seems to know more about the ways we handle death than a movie like “
Love Story
” ever guessed.
The movie begins at the Mayo Clinic, follows the team through spring training, and then carries it through a season that feels remarkably like a Chicago Cubs year: a strong start, problems during the hot weather, dissension on the team, and then a pennant drive that in the movie, anyway is successful. There isn’t a lot of play-by-play action, only enough to establish the games and make the character points. So when the team manager and the pitcher conspire to let Bruce finish his last game, despite his illness, the action footage is relevant and moving.
“Bang the Drum Slowly” was adapted for the screen by Mark Harris, from his observant 1955 novel. He seems to understand baseball players, or at least he can create convincing ones; if real baseball players aren’t like the ones in this movie, somehow they should be. The director,
John Hancock
, is good with his actors and very good at establishing a lot of supporting characters without making a point of it in this area he reminds me of
Robert Altman
’s shorthand typecasting in “
M*A*S*H
” and “
McCabe and Mrs. Miller
”. Some of the best scenes are in the clubhouse, an arena of hope, despair, anger, practical jokes, and impassioned speeches by the manager.
He’s played by
Vincent Gardenia
as a crafty, tough tactician with a heart of gold he tries to conceal. “When I die,” he says during one pre-game pep talk, “in the newspapers they’ll write that the sons of bitches of this world have lost their leader.” He knows Bruce and Henry are concealing something, but he doesn’t know what, and his efforts to find out are hilariously frustrated. At various times, the midwinter visit to the Mayo Clinic is explained as a fishing trip, a hunting trip, a wenching trip, and a secret mission to rid Bruce of the clap.
Gardenia, as the manager, is the third angle of a triangle that includes very good acting by
Michael Moriarty
, as Henry, and
Robert De Niro
, as Bruce. Henry is the All Star with the $70,000 contract and Bruce is a mediocre catcher who is constantly being ragged by his teammates. Henry’s his only friend, until somehow when the team comes together for the pennant stretch, Bruce starts playing the best ball in his life, and the club somewhat predictably accepts him.
Hancock and Harris avoid any temptation to structure “Bang the Drum Slowly” as a typical sports movie. Although the team does win the pennant, not much of a point is made of that. There are no telegraphed big moments on the field, when everything depends on a strikeout or a home run or something. Even Bruce’s last big hit in his last time at bat is limited, tactfully, to a triple.
Instead of going for a lot of high points, the movie paints characters in their everyday personalities. We get some feeling of life on the road as Henry talks with a hotel telephone operator who’s a baseball fanatic, and Bruce moons over the prostitute he’s in love with. Phil Foster has a great cameo role as a first-base coach with a genius for luring suckers into card games with remarkably elastic rules.
Occupying the background in a lot of shots is the team’s Cuban third baseman, who has it written into his contract that he be provided with a translator. And then, as the movie’s shape begins to be visible, we realize it’s not so much a sports movie as a movie about those elusive subjects, male bonding and work in America. That the males play baseball and that sport is their work is what makes this the ultimate baseball movie; never before has a movie considered the game from the inside out.

Take Shelter 2011 Cast
Michael Shannon as Curtis
Jessica Chastain as Samantha
Shea Whigham as Dewart
Tova Stewart as Hannah
Ray McKinnon as Kyle
Kathy Baker as Sarah
Lisa Gay Hamilton as Kendra
Robert Longstreet as Jim
Written and directed by Jeff Nichols
Drama, Thriller Rated R
for language 120 minutes
Here is a frightening thriller based not on special effects gimmicks but on a dread that seems quietly spreading in the land: that the good days are ending, and climate changes or other sinister forces will sweep away our safety. "Take Shelter" unfolds in a quiet Ohio countryside with big skies and flat horizons, and involves a happy family whose life seems contented.
It is the gift of actor
Michael Shannon
as Curtis LaForche that while appearing to be a stable husband and father with a good job in construction, he also can evoke by his eyes and manner a deep unease. Curtis has what he needs to be happy. He fears he will lose it. His dreams begin to be visited by unusually vivid nightmares: The family dog attacks him, for example, or storms destroy his home.
To the puzzlement of his wife, Samantha 
Jessica Chastain
, and their hearing-impaired daughter, Hannah 
Tova Stewart
, he builds a pen in the backyard for the dog, which had been living peacefully indoors. The storm dreams are not so easily managed. Ominous black clouds gather, their heavy raindrops brown and oily, and so subtle is the direction of
Jeff Nichols
that some of this poisoned rain seems to be real, not imaginary. They live on the outskirts of town, in an area which is swept from time to time with tornadoes.
His behavior begins to concern his best friend and workmate, Dewart 
Shea Whigham
, who helps him as much as he can. Their friendship dramatizes the thin ice beneath so many people these days, when employment is threatened by uncontrolled forces, and if you lose a job, there may not be another one. Stories about Curtis begin to spread in the community, and Curtis is not paranoid when he thinks people are talking about him. His explosion at a community benefit dinner is terrifying in its energy.
This is the second collaboration by writer-director and star, whose powerful "
Shotgun Stories
" 2007, established Nichols as a gifted new filmmaker and further cemented Shannon\s growing reputation as an actor of uncommon force: the young
Christopher Walken
, my wife says, and he does embody the same shifting air of disquiet. As his wife, Jessica Chastain is effective in her seventh major role this year; since "
The Tree of Life
," has any young actress ever put together such a series of roles?
"A few jolting shots early in the film establish the possibility that bad things could happen. But Nichols builds his suspense carefully. Curtis is tormented but intelligent; fearing the familys history of mental illness, he visits his schizophrenic mother "
Kathy Baker
" in a care facility to ask if she had ever been troubled by bad dreams. He checks books out of the library. He turns to the areas obviously inadequate public health facilities."
But he also acts as if his warnings should be taken seriously, He is driven to guard the family he loves. He borrows money from the bank and equipment from work to greatly expand an old storm shelter in his backyard. His wife grows frightened by his behavior. His job and health insurance are threatened.
And then a storm comes. Its nature need not be discussed here. It leads to a scene of searing power, in which Samantha tells Curtis that it is safe once again to return to the surface — that it is a step he must take personally. The story seems somewhat resolved. Then the film concludes not with a "surprise ending" but with a series of shots that brilliantly summarize all that has gone before. This is masterful filmmaking.
In films like "Shotgun Stories," William Friedkin\s "
Bug
," Sam Mendes\ "
Revolutionary Road
" and Werner Herzog\s "
My Son, My Son, What Have Ye Done
," Shannon has attracted the best directors with his uncanny power. His performance in the play "Mistakes Were Made," was one of the most amazing performances I\ve ever seen. Thinking again over what he does in "Take Shelter," I think an Oscar nomination for best actor would be well-deserved.

Wildcats 1986 Cast
Goldie Hawn as Molly
Swoosie Kurtz as Verna
Robyn Lively as Alice
Brandy Gold as Marian
James Keach as Frank
Jan Hooks as Stephanie
Bruce McGill as Darwell
Nipsy Russell as Edwards
Tab Thacker as Finch
Scott Eng as Lineman
Directed by Michael Ritchie
Produced by Anthea Sylbert
Screenplay by Ezra Sacks
Photographed by Donald E. Thorin
Music by Hawk Wolinski
James Newton Howard Action, Comedy, Drama, Sports Film
Rated R 107 minutes
"Wildcats" is allegedly about Goldie Hawn\s attempts to find success as the coach of a boys\ high school football team. But most of the big scenes and almost all of the dialogue in the movie are assigned to her grownup friends, and the team gets lost in the shuffle; her coaching is the gimmick, not the subject of this movie. With the exception of a Refrigerator clone 
Tab Thacker
" who plays the tallest and fattest member of her team, Hawns players are sort of a faceless mass that mills around on cue."
The movie, which was filmed in Chicago, was directed by
Michael Ritchie
, the same man who made "
The Bad News Bears
" 10 years ago. That was a movie where we really cared about the members of the team - a movie that was about a coach and a team. "Wildcats" is about how spunky Hawn is and how cute it\s supposed to be that this little woman can make all those great big football players do what she says.
"See what happened here? The filmmakers, the producers and Hawn herself bought the premise instead of looking for the plot. The problem with the movie is that they started with a character description instead of with a story. The fact that Hawn plays a boys football coach is not in itself interesting. Her relationship with the team would have been interesting, if theyd developed one."
But, no, they thought they had everything they needed. They thought they could clone "
Rocky
" one more time. I was discussing the formula in this space just the other week. It\s called the CLIDVIC Plague. The acronym stands for the CLImb from Despair to VICtory.
CLIDVIC movies start with a major defeat for the hero. Then follows a period of despair, and then determined training. The movie ends with a victory. At the end of "Wildcats," whadaya know, Hawn\s team beats the crosstown rivals.
I\ve seen that ending before. Just in the last few weeks, for example, I saw the winning football game at the end of "The Best Of Times," and the winning hockey match at the end of "
Youngblood
," and God knows how many winning bicycle races and wrestling matches I saw last year - not to mention "
Rocky Iv
," of course. The CLIDVIC Plague rhymes with "kid pic" is becoming an insidious force in the movie industry; it convinces producers that they have a plot when, in fact, all they have is a boring structure to trap their characters.
"I mentioned that the movie doesnt make much of an effort to make the football players into individuals. Instead, it gives us an astonishingly uninteresting subplot, in which Hawns ex-husband "
James Keach
 threatens to win custody of his daughters because of Hawn\s alleged misconduct. Her players drink beer in her house and make out with their girlfriends, etc. Since most of the players are black, the movie supplies a wholly unnecessary streak of implied racism in the Keach character. "Wildcats" is clearly an attempt by Hawn to repeat a formula that was wonderfully successful in "
Private Benjamin
": Wide-eyed Goldie copes with the real world. It was less successful in "
Protocol
," and now it\s worn out altogether.

Cry Freedom 1987 Cast
Kevin Kline as Donald Woods
Penelope Wilton as Wendy Woods
Denzel Washington as Steve Biko
John Thaw as Kruger
Sophie Mgcina as Evalina
Joseph Marcell as Moses
Produced and directed by Richard Attenborough
Screenplay by John Briley
Photographed by Ronnie Taylor
Edited by Lesley Walker
Music by George Fenton
Jonas Gwangwa Drama
Rated PG 157 minutes
"Cry Freedom" begins with the story of a friendship between a white liberal South African editor and an idealistic young black leader who later dies at the hands of the South African police. But the black leader is dead and buried by the movie\s halfway point, and the rest of the story centers on the editor\s desire to escape South Africa and publish a book. You know there is something wrong with the premise of this movie when you see that the actress who plays the editor\s wife is billed above the actor who plays the black leader. This movie promises to be an honest account of the turmoil in South Africa but turns into a routine cliff-hanger about the editor\s flight across the border. It\s sort of a liberal yuppie version of that Disney movie where the brave East German family builds a hot-air balloon and floats to freedom. The problem with this movie is similar to the dilemma in South Africa: Whites occupy the foreground and establish the terms of the discussion, while the 80 percent non-white majority remains a shadowy, half-seen presence in the background.
Yet "Cry Freedom" is a sincere and valuable movie, and despite my fundamental reservations about it, I think it probably should be seen. Although everybody has heard about apartheid and South Africa remains a favorite subject of campus protest, few people have an accurate mental picture of what the country actually looks and feels like. It is an issue, not a place, and "Cry Freedom" helps to visualize it. The movie was mostly shot across the border in Zimbabwe, the former nation of Southern Rhodesia, which serves as an adequate stand-in. We see the manicured lawns of the whites, who seem to live in country club suburbs, and the jerry-built "townships" of the blacks, and we sense the institutional racism of a system where black maids call their employers "master" and even white liberals accept that without a blink.
The film begins with the stories of Donald Woods, editor of the East London South Africa Daily Dispatch, and Steve Biko, a young black leader who has founded a school and a clinic for his people and continues to hold out hope that blacks and whites can work together to change South Africa. In the more naive days of the 1960s and 1970s, his politics are seen as "black supremecy," and Woods writes sanctimonious editorials describing Biko as a black racist. Through an emissary, Biko arranges to meet Woods. Eventually the two men become friends, and Woods sees black life in South Africa at first hand, something few white South Africans have done. Although how many white Chicagoans, for that matter, know their way around the South Side?
Although Biko is played with quiet power by
Denzel Washington
, he is seen primarily through the eyes of Woods 
Kevin Kline
". There arent many scenes in which we see Biko without Woods, and fewer still in which his friendship with Woods isnt the underlying subject of the scene. No real attempt is made to show daily life in Bikos world, although we move into the Woods home, meet his wife, children, maid and dog, and share his daily routine, there is no similar attempt to portray Bikos daily reality."
There is a reason for that. "Cry Freedom" is not about Biko. It is Woods\ story from beginning to end, describing how he met Biko, how his thinking was changed by the man, how he witnessed black life at first hand by patronizing a black speakeasy in a township and having a few drinks, and how, after he was placed under house arrest by the South Africa government, he engineered his escape from South Africa. The story has a happy ending: Woods and his family made it safely to England, where he was able to publish two books about his experience. The bad news is that Biko was killed.
For the first half of this movie, I was able to suspend judgment. Interesting things were happening, the performances were good and it is always absorbing to see how other people live. Most of the second half of the movie, alas, is taken up with routine clock-and-dagger stuff, including Woods\ masquerade as a Catholic priest, his phony passport and his attempt to fool South African border officials. These scenes could have been recycled out of any thriller from any country in any time, right down to the ominous long shots of the men patroling the border bridge and the tense moment when the guard\s eyes flick up and down from the passport photo. "Cry Freedom" is not really a story of today\s South Africa, and it is not really the story of a black leader who tried to change it. Like "
"All the Presidents Men"
," it\s essentially the story of heroic, glamorous journalism. Remember that
Kirk Douglas
movie, "The Big Carnival," where the man was trapped in the cave and Douglas played the ambitious reporter who prolonged the man\s imprisonment so that he could make his reputation by covering the story? I\m not saying the Woods story is a parallel. But somehow the comparison did arise in my mind.

Chuka 1967 Cast
Rod Taylor as Chuka
Ernest Borgnine as Sgt. Hansbach
John Mills as Col. Valois
Luciana Paluzzi as Veronica Kleitz
James Whitmore as Trent
Louis Hayward as Maj. Benson
production Rodlor
Produced by Rod Taylor
Jack Jason Directed by
Gordon Douglas From a screenplay by
Richard Jessup Action, Drama, Western
Rod Taylor\s "Chuka" is an intelligently acted and directed Western that has been burdened, for some reason, with a plot so melodramatic that the effect is lost.
The loss is a considerable one, because Taylor has given a great deal to his portrayal of Chuka, a professional gunfighter, and other roles in the film are filled with similar care.
Taylor, I suspect, is most widely known for his appearances in a couple of those typically stupid
Doris Day
movies. But he has always been a good cut above the standard Hollywood leading man of the
Tony Curtis
and
Rock Hudson
variety, and in such films as "
Hotel
" 1967, and "The Birds" he gave evidence of considerable acting ability. He has an authority and depth lacking in the papier-mâché cutouts Miss Day usually favors for her leading men.
But his roles, so far, have not been filled with opportunity for much acting with the exception of his early appearances opposite
Elizabeth Taylor
. He has been trapped, typically, in empty, smiling, shallow roles in pictures like "The VIPs" and "The Glass-Bottomed Boat."
In "Chuka," he at last had a film largely within his own hands, as producer and star. And he obviously made an effort to achieve something out of the ordinary. The film tells the story of an outcast gunfighter who is trapped by circumstances into helping to defend a fort surrounded by starving Indians and manned by castoffs and failures.
John Mills
, as the commander, plays an alcoholic and impotent Englishman who decides to defend the fort and prove his own bravery. Taylor tries to talk him out of it: Everyone will be saved if the fort is, abandoned and its food given to the Indians. But Mills will not listen.
The plot is complicated by the presence of a Mexican lady 
Luciana Paluzzi
" who was in love with Chuka years before on her fathers ranch. When Chuka was sent away, he became a gunfighter, etc., and all the old Freudian hang-ups turned up like clockwork. They always do in the movies. Now, on the night before the expected Indian attack, Chuka passes up an opportunity to escape the fort with the woman and her ward "
Angela Dorian
. Instead, they make love in the stable and wait for the end.
In this and other particulars, "Chuka" depends upon elements of Idiot Plot, that tendency of the movies to get people into situations that they could easily get themselves out of if they weren\t such damned idiots.
"It is all too pat. Every officer in the fort has something to prove to himself, and by the time everything has been proven, everyone is dead. The starving Indians, Chukas coincidental reunion with his old love, the commanders secret fear of cowardice: These are all elements of a dozen or a hundred other films. No amount of competent acting will bring them back to life."
Still, Taylor is very good in the title role. And
Ernest Borgnine
, as the commander\s loyal sergeant, demonstrates a stubbornness and simplicity that almost but not quite reminds of "Marty."
Gordon Douglas
, as if to make amends for "
In Like Flint
," has directed with a sure hand. Many of the scenes involving small talk and time-killing by Chuka and the soldiers are handled with an easy, slow grace.
But taken all together, "Chuka" doesn\t work. The plot should have been pared closer to the bone.

A Bronx Tale 1993 Cast
Robert De Niro as Lorenzo
Chazz Palminteri as Sonny
Directed by Robert De Niro
Action, Crime, Drama, Thriller Rated R
For Strong Language and Several Scenes Of Violence 121 minutes
A boy comes of age in an Italian-American neighborhood in the Bronx. His father gives him a piece of advice: "Nothing is more tragic than a wasted talent." A street-corner gangster gives him another piece of advice: "Nobody really cares." These pieces of advice seem contradictory, but the boy finds that they make a nice fit.
The movie starts when he is 9. Sitting on his front stoop, he sees Sonny, the gangster, shoot a man in what looks like a fight over a parking space. Then Sonny looks him in the eyes, hard, and the kids gets the message: "Don\t squeal!" Sonny 
Chazz Palminteri
 wants to do something for the kid, and offers a cushy $150 a week paycheck to his father, Lorenzo 
Robert De Niro
. Lorenzo turns him down. He is a workingman, proud that he supports his family by driving a bus.
"He doesnt like the Mafia and doesnt want the money."
"The kid, whose name is Calogero but who is called C, idolizes Sonny. He likes the way Sonny exercises a quiet authority, and talks with his hands, and dresses well. When C is 17, he goes to work for Sonny, against his fathers wishes. And in the year when most of the film is set, he learns lessons that he will use all of his life."
"A Bronx Tale" was written for the stage by Palminteri, who plays Sonny with a calm grace in the film, but was Calogero in real life. There have been a lot of movies about neighborhood Mafiosos Martin Scorsese\s "
GoodFellas
" was the best, but this movie isn\t like the others. It doesn\t tell some dumb story about how the bus driver and the mobster have to shoot each other, or about how C is the hostage in a tug of war. It\s about two men with some experience of life, who love this kid and want to help him out.
Lorenzo, the bus driver, gives sound advice: "You want to see a real hero? Look at a guy who gets up in the morning and goes off to work and supports his family. That\s heroism." But Sonny gives sound advice, too. One of the things he tells C is that you cannot live your life on the basis of what other people think you should do, because when the chips are down, nobody really cares. You\re giving them a power they don\t really have. That sounds like deep thinking for a guy who hangs on the corner and runs a numbers racket, but Sonny, as played by Palminteri, is a complex, lonely character, who might have been a priest or a philosopher had not life called him to the vocation of neighborhood boss.
It is 1968. Blacks are moving into the next neighborhood.
"Cs friends entertain themselves by beating up on black kids who ride past on their bikes. C has other things on his mind. On his fathers bus, he has seen a lovely black girl named Jane Taral Hicks, and been struck with the thunderbolt of love. From the way she smiles back, she likes him, too. When he discovers that they go to the same school, he knows his fate is to ask her out."
But he is troubled, because in 1968 this is not the thing for a kid from his neighborhood or hers to do. He questions both his father and Sonny, posing a hypothetical case, and although neither bursts into liberal-speak about the brotherhood of man, both tell him about the same thing, which is that you have to do what you think is right, or live with the consequences.
"Cs romance is a sweet subplot of the movie, which is filled with life and memories. There are, for example, the characters in Sonnys crowd, including a guy who is such bad luck he has to go stand in the bathroom when Sonny is rolling the dice. And another guy with a complexion so bad he looks like raisin bread. And strange visitors from outside the neighborhood - bikers and hippies and black people - who remind us that C lives in a closed and insular community."
"The climax of the film finds C inside a car he does not want to occupy, going with his friends to do something he doesnt want to do. This part is very true. Peer pressure is a terrible thing among teenage boys. It causes them to do things they desperately wish they could avoid. Theyre afraid to look chicken, or different. C is no exception. His whole life hinges on the outcome of that ride."
"A Bronx Tale" is a very funny movie sometimes, and very touching at other times. It is filled with life and colorful characters and great lines of dialogue, and De Niro, in his debut as a director, finds the right notes as he moves from laughter to anger to tears. What\s important about the film is that it\s about values.
About how some boys grow up into men who can look at themselves in the mirror in the morning, and others just go along with the crowd, forgetting after a while that they ever had a choice.

Holy Smoke! 2000 Cast
Kate Winslet as Ruth Barron
Harvey Keitel as P.J. Waters
Pam Grier as Carol
Written by Jane Campion
Anna Comedy, Drama, Foreign
Rated R For Strong Sexuality and Language
114 minutes "Holy Smoke" begins as a movie about the deprogramming of a cult member and ends with the deprogramming of the deprogrammer. It\s not even a close call.
The cult member is Ruth 
Kate Winslet
, an Australian who has gone to India and allied herself with a guru. And the deprogrammer is
Harvey Keitel
, summoned by Ruth\s parents; he stalks off the plane like his no-nonsense fix-it man in "
Pulp Fiction
" and then starts falling to pieces. The movie leaves us wondering why the guru didn\t become Ruth\s follower, too.
"The film isnt really about cults at all, but about the struggle between men and women, and its a little surprising, although not boring, when it turns from a mystic travelogue into a feminist parable. The director is"
Jane Campion
"
The Piano
", who wrote the screenplay with her sister Anna. Like so many Australian films perhaps even a majority, "Holy Smoke" suggests that everyone in Australia falls somewhere on the spectrum between goofy and eccentric, none more than characters invariably named Mum and Dad. Parents are totally unhinged beneath a facade of middle-class conventionality; their children seem crazy, but like many movie mad people, are secretly saner than anyone else. Campion\s first film, "
Sweetie
," was an extreme example; "Holy Smoke" reins in the strangeness a little, although to be sure there\s a scene where Keitel wanders the outback wearing a dress and lipstick, like a passenger who fell off "
The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert
." Ruth, the Winslet character, journeys to India and falls under the sway of a mystic guru. Her parents trick her into returning, and hire P.J. Waters Keitel to fly over from the United States and deprogram her. At this point I was hoping perhaps for something like "
Ticket to Heaven
" 1981, the powerful Canadian film about the struggle for a cult member\s mind. But no. The moment Ruth and P.J. face off against each other, their struggle is not over cult beliefs, but about the battle between men and women. And P.J., with his obsolete vocabulary of sexual references, is no match for the strong-willed young woman who overwhelms him mentally, physically and sexually.
"Winslet and Keitel are both interesting in the film, and indeed Winslet seems to be following Keitels long-standing career plan, which is to go with intriguing screenplays and directors and let stardom take care of itself. That may mean he doesnt get paid $20 million a picture, but $20 million roles, with rare exceptions, are dogs anyway--because theyve been chewed over and regurgitated by too many timid executives. A smaller picture like this, shot out of the mainstream, has a better chance of being quirky and original."
"And quirky it is, even if not successful. Maybe its the setup that threw me off. Ruth comes onscreen as one kind of person--dreamy, escapist, a volunteer for mind-controlling beliefs--and then turns into an articulate spokeswoman for Jane and Anna Campions ideas. Its also a little disappointing that the film didnt penetrate more deeply into the Indian scenes, instead of using them mostly just as setup for the feminist payoff."
"And its difficult to see how the Ruth at the end of the film could have fallen under the sway of the guru at the beginning. Not many radical feminists seek out male gurus in patriarchal cultures."

Simon and the Oaks 2012 Cast
Bill Skarsgard as Simon
Stefan Godicke as Erik
Karl Linnertorp as Isak
Jan Josef Liefers as Ruben
Directed by Lisa Ohlin
Written by Marnie Blok
Based on the novel by Marianne Fredriksson
Drama Rated NR
122 minutes "Here is the story of two boys coming of age in two strangely combined families. Poetic, romantic and idealistic, it begins in 1939 and concludes after the end of World War II. Its not strictly speaking a Holocaust movie, although the dark cloud of that atrocity arches overhead."
The setting of "Simon and the Oaks" is a Swedish coastal community, where we meet Simon Jonatan S. Wachter, a dreamy young boy drawn to the solitude of an old oak, where in a tree house he devours books and is filled with ineffable longings. His parents, Karin and Erik Helen Sjoholm and
Stefan Godicke
, are salt-of-the-earth types, his dad a master carpenter. Inspired by his books, Simon is drawn to enroll in the local school. His father opposes this, seeing it as a threat to the family.
In the school, he meets a German Jewish boy named Isak Karl Martin Eriksson, whose parents fled from the Nazis. His father, Ruben 
Jan Josef Liefers
", owns a bookstore in the town, and Simon regards with awe all the books he sees in its window. When a fellow student taunts Isak for being Jewish, Simon comes to his rescue and bloodies the bullys nose. Then Isak takes Simon home to meet his parents, who live in a luxurious flat above the store, filled with art and exuding sophistication."
"Keep these characters in mind. There is more to them than we suspect. We gradually discover that Karin and Erik are childless and raised Simon after he was born to his unmarried Aunt Inga Cecilia Nilsson. Simons father was a German Jewish violinist who had a romance with Inga, which was cut short by the war. So Karin and Erik may have notions about why Simon is drawn to music and a life of the mind."
"They invite Isak to come and live with them, as a refuge from anti-Semitic bullying at school. Subtly, the families merge, and its clear Isaks father and Simons mother are attracted to each other. Erik notices this, but exercises tactful restraint. He is compensated because Isak is as fascinated by Eriks boat building as Simon is by Rubens bookselling. Each father gets a surrogate son. And both sons are targets for the Nazis."
"We may anticipate that the movie will advance slowly through the war and reach its climax that way, but no; unlike most movies involving the Holocaust, this one places the wars end at the halfway point and leaps ahead. Now the two young actors are replaced by older ones; Simon is played by"
Bill Skarsgard
"Stellans son, and Isak by"
Karl Linnertorp
.
The oak tree is not forgotten, nor the images which young Simon imagined in the cloud formations above it. Ruben takes Simon to concerts, which transport him, and gives the boy a radio-phonograph, which fills the simple seaside home with music. Subplots involve illness and sexual initiation.
The film is based on a Scandinavian best-selling novel by
Marianne Fredriksson
, and arrives bedecked by 13 Swedish nominations and two awards. It is unabashedly sentimental and epic, and rather bold in the way it takes place during and after the Holocaust but is not defined by it. The real story is of two unconventional families who help each other in a time fraught with danger. I was intrigued by the relationship of the two fathers, who arrive at an unspoken detente for the benefit of the two sons.

Sidekicks 1993 Cast
Chuck Norris as Chuck Norris
Jonathan Brandis as Barry Gabrewski
Directed by Aaron Norris
Action, Adventure, Drama, Family Rated PG
100 minutes "Sidekicks" is sweet but predictable, the kind of movie where you enjoy the ride but recognize the terrain. Remember the old comic book ads where the bully kicked sand into the eyes of the 90-pound weakling? But then, after the weakling got himself into shape, he came back to beat the bad guy and win the admiring praise of the girls? "Sidekicks" tells the same durable story, and it still works about as well as it ever did.
Jonathan Brandis
"stars as Barry Gabrewski, a kid who escapes into his daydreams to avoid the realities of his everyday life, in which an asthma condition prevents him from ordinary physical activity. In school, hes mocked by the class bully and also by a particularly unkind physical education teacher, who exists primarily in order to be cruel on demand."
"In Barrys fantasies, it doesnt work like that. He imagines himself teaming up with karate movie hero"
Chuck Norris
, to beat up the bad guys and save the girl, who in all of the dreams looks exactly like Miss Chen Julia Nickson-Soul, his schoolteacher.
Taking pity on the class outcast, Miss Chen introduces him to her uncle, Mr. Lee Mako, recently arrived from China - so recently, indeed, that he hasn\t seen any of "
The Karate Kid
" 1984 movies and doesn\t know his role has been played before.
We have two choices here. I can describe the rest of the plot. Or you can decide for yourself if Barry becomes a junior karate master and defeats the class bully in the big match at the end of the movie. If I supply additional information, such as that
Joe Piscopo
plays the brutal, psychotic head of a local karate school, or that Barry has a crush on a girl in his class, you might be able to intuit additional developments.
"The movies big surprise is the materialization of Chuck Norris, as himself. In town for a charity event, he agrees to stand in Barrys corner, and helps out on the day when the kid turns his whole life around. Norris is believable in the role, not so much because he is playing himself as because he is the kind of nice guy who actually would do something like that."
Mako, as old Mr. Lee, is also believable; he has a way of combining comedy with mayhem that is curiously charming. Piscopo, who has apparently not stopped pumping iron since his infamous Rolling Stone cover, grunts and snarls like a master. He seems to have dropped his comedy career in order to reinvent himself as a B-movie villain.
Beau Bridges
, as Barry\s distracted dad, walks through an easy role; his work in the current HBO movie "The Positively True Adventures of the Alleged Texas Cheerleader-Murdering Mom" shows him much closer to top form.
Fairness in reviewing requires me to observe that not everyone may have seen all of the "Karate Kid" movies and the countless other antecedents of this film. To them, it may seem more original. After all, a new generation of moviegoers comes along every few years. For kids of about Barry\s age say, 11 to 14, "Sidekicks" might have a special charm. And the PG rating reflects the fact that the violence never goes over the top.

New Jersey Drive 1995 Cast
Sharron Corley as Jason Petty
Gabriel Casseus as Midget
Saul Stein as Roscoe
Petty Gwen McGee as Renee
Directed by Nick Gomez
Produced by Larry Meistrich
Bob Gosse Action, Adventure, Crime, Drama
Rated R For Pervasive Strong Language, and Some Violence, Drugs and Drinking
98 minutes If the story in "New Jersey Drive" seems to drift, it\s because the lives of its teenage characters are aimless. They spend their days stealing and joyriding in cars, and then selling, crashing or abandoning them. Their lives have provided them with no other focus, and it is clear that sooner or later most of these kids are going to be in jail, or dead.
That is especially clear to Jason Petty 
Sharron Corley
", a 15-year-old who seems a little smarter and more prudent than the guys he runs with. He doesnt even particularly care about cars, but his best friend, Midget "
Gabriel Casseus
", lives for them, and so Jason goes along for the ride. He and his friends are still kids, but dangerous kids - and dangerous most of all to themselves, because what theyre doing is stupid, and the cops have them beat on guns and strategy."
The cops in the movie are mostly white, and all of the other characters are black, so the stage is set for racial confrontation.
But
Nick Gomez
, who wrote and directed the movie, isn\t out to make all the cops into monsters and all the thieves into kids who are "really" victims.
Both sides are a little more three-dimensional. He gives us a bad cop named Roscoe 
Saul Stein
", who takes revenge with an ambush when his own car is stolen, and who is under suspicion of murder during most of the movie. Roscoe and some other cops beat suspects and lay traps for them. On the other hand, the young thieves place lives in danger with their incredibly reckless driving. And youre really kind of asking for it when you steal a squad car."
Gomez is an interesting filmmaker. His first movie, "
Laws of Gravity
" 1991, was made for about $35,000 and did an uncanny job of portraying a group of twobit white criminals, the kind who steal shampoo from a drugstore and then get into fights over whether they chose the right brand. That movie also went for texture and dialogue instead of plot: It was a study of how stupidity, boredom and the lack of any vision or goal in life can lead to an existence that inexorably attracts trouble. It was essentially the story of how people end up shot dead outside taverns on Saturday night - how it\s not an accident, but a fate they were hurtling toward.
With "New Jersey Drive," Gomez has a more adequate budget and
Spike Lee
as an executive producer, and he uses black characters instead of white ones, but basically his interest is the same: He wants to look at how an empty lifestyle leads to trouble. If the only choices you can imagine in life are stealing cars or standing around looking at other people driving stolen cars, how long are you gonna stand around? The movie is expert on how cars are stolen it takes about 10 seconds. It is also expert on how a smart and essentially prudent kid ends up inside a lot of stolen cars and gets into a lot of trouble. Yes, the cops are out to get him - but at one point in the movie, a neighborhood guy he hardly knows tries to shoot him dead because of an argument over nothing. "I just get tired of running," he finally says.
Gomez has a good ear for dialogue we learn that "bouncing" is leaving, and a good feel for the way life is closing in on Jason, whose mother 
Gwen McGee
" tries hard to keep him in line but rarely knows where he is. She reasons with him and warns him of the danger hes in, but Jason cant hear her because all of his values are grounded on approval from his peer group."
It\s interesting how "New Jersey Drive" doesn\t really pull back for a wider view until the very end. Everyone in the movie - kids and cops - seems contained and absorbed by the lifestyles surrounding stolen vehicles. There\s not racism in the cop\s behavior as much as an us-against-them attitude, as if the cops and the thieves are fighting for control of the same turf. The message, which comes so late in the film it\s hardly necessary, is that this is a war with no point, especially since you\re going to lose.

"Margarets Museum 1997" Cast
Helena Bonham-Carter as Margaret MacNeil
Clive Russell as Neil Currie
Craig Olejnik as Jimmy
Kate Nelligan as Catherine
Kenneth Welsh as Angus
Directed by Mort Ransen
Written by Gerald Wexler
Ransen Drama
Rated R For Strong Language and Some Sexuality
118 minutes The opening shot of "Margaret\s Museum\\ looks like a painting by Andrew Wyeth, of a little clapboard cottage in a sea of grass on a cliffside. Two visitors drive up to the "museum,\\ and a moment later one runs from the house screaming. Then a title card takes us back "three years earlier.\\ As openings go, this one plays as if it belongs on another film. That it doesn\t gradually becomes clear. We are in the mining town of Cape Breton, Nova Scotia, in the late 1940s, where the coal pits take a terrible toll in life and limb--and where Margaret Helena Bonham Carter and her family live in half a house, because the earth subsided into a mine shaft beneath the other half.
Margaret scrubs floors at the hospital. One day a strapping fellow named Neil 
Clive Russell
 walks into the restaurant, half drunk, and begins to serenade her with big bagpipes. She scorns men, but likes this one, and brings him home to meet her bitter mother 
Kate Nelligan
, who has buried a husband and a son after pit disasters, and cares for a father whose lungs are so filled with dust that he needs to be regularly slammed on the back "Don\t forget to thump your grandfather!\\.
"Margaret\s Museum\\ is the story of the people who must make their living from the cold-hearted, cost-conscious mining company, but it isn\t like other films with similar themes like "Sons and Lovers,\\ "The Molly Maguires\\ or "Matewan\\. It\s quirkier and more eccentric, and has a thread of wry humor running through it. The dialogue, inspired by the short stories of Sheldon Currie, shows that Celtic wit has traveled well to the new land. When Margaret encourages her younger brother to ask his girl to the Sunday dance, he replies, "They\re not supposed to dance on Sunday.\\ She tells him, "They\re not supposed to work. Dancing\s not work.\\ And he replies, "They\re Protestant, aren\t they? For them, it\s work.\\ Most of the movie is the love story of Margaret and Neil. He towers above her slight frame and threatens to force them all out of the house with his drinking, his buddies and his songs. But he listens when she protests, and mends his ways. Soon he has built her the curious house near the sea, using parts scrounged around town. The bedroom, with walls and a ceiling made from old windows, is going to be bloody cold in a Nova Scotia winter. As Margaret\s mother, Nelligan is hard and dour, and can see no point in a life that snatches all of your loved ones away from you. "I\ll have five sons and three daughters,\\ Margaret tells her. "I can hear them in the bagpipe, screaming to be born.\\ Her mother\s predictions about the fates of these unborn infants are blood-chilling.
The margins of the movie are filled with colorful characters. With old grandfather, who coughs and writes his song requests on a note pad. With Uncle Angus 
Kenneth Welsh
", who dreams of sparing his nephew a life in the mines, and works double shifts in hopes that if he just once sees Toronto, hell see there is a different life waiting for him. With the pit manager, who orders his red-haired daughter Andrea Morris not to see Margarets brother "
Craig Olejnik
. The daughter and the brother perform their own marriage ceremony solemnly, before two candles in a root cellar.
The destination of the film may be guessed by some, but I will not reveal it, nor how it contributes to Margaret\s museum and its sign, "The Cost of Coal.\\ What is surprising about the film is not its ending, but how it gets there. Helena Bonham Carter might seem an unlikely candidate for this role she took it in preference to the lead in "Breaking the Waves\\ but she is just right--plucky, sexy, bemused, glorious in a scene where Neil sneaks her into the miners\ cleaning area and she takes the first hot shower of her life. Russell, as Neil, is sort of a rougher-hewn
Liam Neeson
, strong, gentle and poetic. And Nelligan is astounding in the way she allows her humanity to peek out from behind the mother\s harsh defenses. "Margaret\s Museum\\ is one of those small, nearly perfect movies that you know, seeing it, is absolutely one of a kind.

The Music Lovers 1971 Drama, Foreign, Music, Romance
Rated R 122 minutes
Ken Russell
\s "The Music Lovers" is an involved and garish private fantasy which Russell, alas, presents to us as the life of Tchaikovsky. Poor Tchaikovsky. I know it is against the rules to complain that this or that detail may not be precisely accurate, or that Tchaikovsky may not have been dealt with in the fairest possible manner. I know, because I get letters from graduate students, that I must resolutely examine the film itself or the "film itself" as they put it--and put aside considerations from real life. What difference does it matter whether Tchaikovsky actually existed as Russell portrays him--as long as Russell has made a good film?
Well, I suppose there\s something to be said for that point of view, had Russell made a good film and not said it was about Tchaikovsky. But "The Music Lovers" is libelous not only to the composer but to his music. I am no composer, Lord knows, but I have a notion that even the greatest of composers must have spent most of their time hard at work composing. I doubt whether their great works came to them, full-blown, in moments of sexual, religious, political, or sporting ecstasy. I doubt whether any great work in any field of art "comes" to anybody. Great novels are not produced by automatic writing, so why should great symphonies be?
"Russell apparently thinks they are. And so although his film is more visually daring and more sexually explicit than other biographies of composers, it rests on the same fallacious assumption: That a sunset, or a woman or a man, in Tchaikovskys case, or a famous naval victory, or something could inspire the composer to sit down and dash off a few inspired moments."
Lest you accuse me of exaggerating, let me just mention that Tchaikovsky\s mental image, when the cannons roar in the "1812 Overture," is supposed to be a friend\s head being blown off. Better we should have a movie in which Russell\s image, during the same passage, is of his own head being blown off. We would save the head for last, of course, in order to deal with lesser extremities of the minor works.
"The Music Lovers" is totally irresponsible, then, as a film about, or inspired by, or parallel to, or bearing a vague resemblance to, Tchaikovsky, his life and times. It is not, however, a complete failure. Ken Russell is a most deviously baroque director, sucking us down with him into his ornate fantasies of decadent interior decoration, until every fringe on every curtain has a fringe of its own, and the characters have fringes, too, and the characters elbow their way through a grotesque jungle of candlesticks, potted plant stands, incense sticks, old champagne bottles, and gilt edges, and it is almost certain that something is happening in the movie. But what?

Priest of Love 1981 Cast
Ian McKellen as D. H. Lawrence
Janet Suzman as Frieda
Ava Gardner as Mabel Dodge
Penelope Keith as Dorothy Brett
Jorge River as Tony Luhan
Sir John Gielgud as Herbert Muskett
Directed by Christopher Miles
Produced by Miles
Andrew Donally Screenplay by
Alan Plater Based on the book by
Harry T. Moore Drama
Rated R 125 minutes
It\s an irony, but there you are: The two best films about the\r\nlife of the passionate British novelist D. H. Lawrence are based on his\r\nfiction. They are "Sons and Lovers" 1960, with
Dean Stockwell
playing a Nottingham miner\s son obviously based on Lawrence\s memories of his\r\nown childhood, and "Women in Love" 1969, with
Glenda Jackson
,
Alan Bates
and
Oliver Reed
"in a sexual tangle that reflected Lawrences liberating\r\nview of sexuality."
Now comes "Priest of Love," a movie based on a\r\nbiography of Lawrence and some of his letters and memoirs. This is said to be a\r\nfactual biography, but, of course, any screen biography is fiction -- in this\r\ncase, the imaginative impressions of the filmmakers about the life of a man they never knew. In "Priest of Love," we see many of the actual\r\nplaces where Lawrence lived, and the homes he occupied there, but we don\t\r\nlearn much about the man. Certainly not as much as we could intuit from those\r\ntwo earlier films and learn from his books, of course.
I\r\nbelieve that underlying poetic truths about people\s lives are more important\r\nthan the facts, anyway. It doesn\t matter when you were born, but it does\r\nmatter what kind of relationships you had with your fellow travelers through\r\nlife. "Priest of Love" doesn\t seem that interested in Lawrence\s\r\ninner life, though. It\s more concerned with arranging attractive photographs\r\nof the period he lived in. It gives us all the correct costumes and props and\r\nattitudes, but when it comes to what made Lawrence live and breathe, the movie\r\nfalls back too easily on talk about "genius."
The\r\ngreat British actor
Ian McKellen
, fresh from his triumph in “
Amadeus
"” on\r\nBroadway, does an interesting job of impersonating Lawrence. He looks something\r\nlike him, he doesnt overact a role filled with temptations for bombast, and in\r\nthe scenes where he is seen writing, we get the impression that there is\r\nthought behind his writing, and not just an actors pushing of a pen."
But\r\nMcKellen is sandbagged by a script that requires him, too, to fall back on\r\nnonsense about genius and the poet\s mission. I was reminded of the story about\r\nthe time publisher Bennett Cerf told James Joyce\s wife, Nora, that her husband\r\nwas a genius. "It\s easy enough for you to say that," Nora sniffed,\r\n"as you do not have to live with the man."
The\r\naction in "Priest of Love" tends to avoid Lawrence\s childhood, which\r\nwas in some ways the most interesting period of his life. We see young Lawrence\r\nin misty, ill-defined flashbacks -- picture postcards about early loves and\r\ndead family. The adult Lawrence is bedeviled by censors, hounded by the British\r\npress, and splashed all over the scandal sheets after his marriage to Frieda\r\nLawrence the press could not forgive Lawrence for marrying the sister of the\r\nGerman flying ace Baron von Richthofen, or for the fact that he took her away\r\nfrom a husband and three children.
The\r\nLawrences set sail for America and the art colony run in Taos, N.M., by the\r\neccentric patroness of the arts Mabel Dodge. It is fascinating to see
Ava Gardner
"playing Dodge; at 60, Gardner is beautiful, mysterious and just right\r\nfor this role. But by then weve lost interest in the movie. It doesnt set up\r\nconflicts, only arguments, and it doesnt generate suspense, only curiosity. I\r\nhave the notion that D. H. Lawrence, if he could see it, would wonder who it\r\nwas about."

Airplane! 1980 Cast
Robert Hays as Ted Striker
Julie Hagerty as Elaine
Kareem Abdul-Jabbar as Murdock
Lloyd Bridges as McCroskey
Peter Graves as Captain Oveur
Leslie Nielsen as Dr. Rumack
Lorna Patterson as Randy
Robert Stack as Kramer
Stephen Stucker as Johnny
Barbara Billingsley as Jive Lady
Joyce Bulifant as Mrs. Davis
James Hong as Japanese General
Maureen McGovern as Nun
Ethel Merman as Lt. Hurwitz
Kenneth Tobey as Air Controller Neubauer
Jimmie Walker as Windshield Wiper Man
Howard Jarvis as Man in Taxi
Written and directed by Jim Abrahams
David Zucker Jerry Zucker
Comedy, Romance Rated PG
88 minutes “Airplane!” is a comedy in the great tradition of high school\r\nskits, the
Sid Caesar
"TV show, Mad magazine, and the dog-eared screenplays\r\npeoples nephews write in lieu of earning their college diplomas. It is\r\nsophomoric, obvious, predictable, corny, and quite often very funny. And the\r\nreason its funny is frequently because its sophomoric, predictable, corny,\r\netc. Example:"
Airplane\r\nCaptain 
Peter Graves
": Surely you cant be serious."
Doctor\r\n
Leslie Nielsen
: I am serious. And don’t call me Shirley.
This\r\nsort of humor went out with
Milton Berle
,
Jerry Lewis
", and knock-knock jokes.\r\nThats why its so funny. Movie comedies these days are so hung up on being\r\ncontemporary, radical, outspoken, and cynically satirical that they sometimes\r\nforget to be funny. And theyve lost the nerve to be as corny as “Airplane!” —\r\nto actually invite loud groans from the audience. The flop “Wholly Moses,” for\r\nexample, is no doubt an infinitely more intelligent comedy—but the problem was,\r\nwe didnt laugh."
“Airplane!”\r\nhas a couple of sources for its inspiration. One of them is obviously “
Airport
"”\r\n1970 and all of its sequels and rip-offs. The other might not come\r\nimmediately to mind unless youre a fan of the late show. Its “Zero Hour”\r\n1957, which starred the quintessential 1950s B-movie cast of Dana Andrews,"
Linda Darnell
, and
Sterling Hayden
. "Airplane!" comes from the same\r\nstudio Paramount and therefore is able to cheerfully borrow the same plot\r\nairliner is imperiled after the crew and most of the passengers are stricken\r\nwith food poisoning. The “Zero Hour” crisis situation how to get the airplane\r\ndown was also borrowed for the terrible “
Airport 1975
,” in which
Karen Black
played a stewardess who tried to follow instructions radioed from the ground.
“Airplane!”\r\nhas two desperate people in the cockpit:
Julie Hagerty
, as the stewardess, and
Robert Hays
, as a former Air Force pilot whose traumatic war experiences have\r\nmade him terrified of flying. The cockpit also contains a very kinky automatic\r\npilot … but never mind.
"The movie exploits the previous films for all theyre worth. The passenger list\r\nincludes a little old lady like Helen Hayes in “Airport”, a guitar-playing\r\nnun like Helen Reddy in “Airport 1975”, and even a critically ill little girl\r\nwhos being flown to an emergency operation "
Linda Blair
"played the role in\r\n“Airport 1975”. Predictable results occur, as when the nuns guitar knocks\r\nloose the little girls intravenous tubes, and she nearly dies while all the\r\npassengers sing along inspirationally."
The movie\s funniest scene, however, occurs in a flashback\r\nexplaining how the stewardess and the Air Force pilot first met and fell in\r\nlove years ago. The scene takes place in an exotic Casablanca-style bar, which\r\nis miraculously transformed when somebody\s hurled at the jukebox and it starts\r\nplaying "Stayin\ Alive" by the Bee Gees. The scene becomes a\r\nhilarious send-up of the disco scenes in “
Saturday Night Fever
,” with the young\r\npilot defying gravity to impress the girl.
“Airplane!”\r\nis practically a satirical anthology of classic movie clichés.
Lloyd Bridges
,\r\nas the ground-control officer, seems to be satirizing half of his straight\r\nroles. The opening titles get an enormous laugh with an unexpected reference to\r\n“
Jaws
.” The neurotic young pilot is talked back into the cockpit in a scene\r\nfrom “Knute Rockne, All American.” And the romantic scenes are played as a soap\r\nopera. None of this really adds up to great comic artistry, but “Airplane!”\r\ncompensates for its lack of original comic invention by its utter willingness\r\nto steal, beg, borrow, and rewrite from anywhere.

Richie Rich 1994 Cast
MacAulay Culkin as Richie Rich
John Larroquette as Laurence Van Dough
Edward Herrmann as Mr. Rich
Jonathan Hyde as Cadbury
Christine Ebersole as Mrs. Rich
Michael McShane as Prof. Keenbean
Directed by Donald Petrie
Produced by Joel Silver
John Davis Written by
Tom S. Parker Jim Jennewein
Based On Based On A Story by
Neil Tolkin Comedy, Family
Rated PG 103 minutes
The underlying story of "Richie Rich" is as old as the hills: The poor little rich boy has all the expensive toys he needs but is lonely and neglected, and has no playmates his own age. What\s sort of wonderful is the way this movie takes that old formula and makes it fresh and new, with actors who give it wit and charm.
One of those actors is Macaulay Culkin, whose recent string of bombs "
The Nutcracker
," "
The Good Son
," "
The Pagemaster
" almost made me forget that the kid does have an engaging screen personality when he isn\t shoehorned into the wrong projects. This is his comeback, and possibly the last film in which he will be able to play a little boy. Clues: He gets his first zit and notices that an aerobics instructor, played by
Claudia Schiffer
", has certain qualities far beyond those of a buddy. Time marches on, and someday well be able to see little Macaulay with a beard and a cigarette."
In "Richie Rich," he plays the richest kid in the world. He lives in a mansion of incalculable luxury, with his parents and his personal valet, and one of the surprises of the movie is that these characters are not the stuffy, distant stereotypes that we would expect in this genre. Instead, they\re warm and funny, and Richie likes them. His dad is played by
Edward Herrmann
looking more than ever like a benevolent Franklin Roosevelt; his mom is
Christine Ebersole
, and
Jonathan Hyde
plays Cadbury, the valet, who looks after Master Richie with the discretion of Jeeves and the devotion of Mr.\xa0Watson.
Rich Industries is one of those movie conglomerates that manufactures lots and lots of everything. Down in the basement of the mansion, the brilliant Professor Keenbeam 
Michael McShane
 works on prototypes for still more brilliant inventions, including a robot bee, and Richie has fun visiting him.
"But Richie is not happy. Hes a naturally gifted baseball player but never gets to play with anybody his own age, and one day, while representing his father at a factory opening, he sees some kids playing a sandlot game across the street. He wants to join in, but they scorn him, and Cadbury ushers him back aboard the corporate helicopter."
"The story of course has a villain. His name is Laurence Van Dough, and hes played by the invaluable"
John Larroquette
"as a slick, oily executive with Rich Industries, who schemes to sabotage the Rich family plane and take control of the company for himself. For a time, it appears his scheme has worked - Richies parents disappear in the Bermuda triangle - but Richie wasnt on the plane and takes control of the company himself."
"It goes without saying that the kid can make better decisions than the board of directors, and soon Rich Industries profits are higher than ever. Richie invites his poor inner-city friends over to the house to play they like the Kid-a-Pult, which hurtles them through the air."
Meanwhile, mom and dad float around on a rubber raft, making the best of the situation "We\re out of Perrier and caviar," Herrmann dolefully tells Ebersole, inspecting the emergency rations. "We\re down to the Champagne." "Richie Rich" contains no elements of startling originality, but director
Donald Petrie
, the script and the actors supply what such an enterprise needs above everything else: style. The movie is amusing precisely because it knows exactly what it is, and never tries too hard or strays into cheap payoffs.
"Richies world - his toys, his staff, his new playmates, even the danger hes in at the hands of the scheming villain - are all seen with a certain sunniness. The movie has the lightness of a 1930s fantasy and none of the hamhanded obviousness of many modern movies about kids. I was a little amazed at how much I enjoyed it."

Jimmy Hollywood 1994 Cast
Joe Pesci as Jimmy Alto
Christian Slater as William
Victoria Abril as Lorraine
Written and Directed by Barry Levinson
Comedy Rated R
For Language 110 minutes
Barry Levinson
\s "Jimmy Hollywood" has a wonderful opening shot in which Jimmy Alto, would-be actor, walks down Hollywood Boulevard reciting the name on every star on the pavement, by memory. There are people who can do this. And there are a lot of people like Jimmy 
Joe Pesci
, holding on desperately to the leftover dreams of many years ago, still hoping to be "discovered." Pesci\s own life is a case in point: He had given up hopes of an acting career and resigned himself to real life in 1980, when
Martin Scorsese
and
Robert De Niro
discovered him and cast him in his careermaking role in "
Raging Bull
." That stroke of luck is still awaiting Jimmy Alto, who hangs out in coffee shops, lives in an apartment where the rent is paid by his girlfriend, and sometimes gets a job as a waiter. His hair, long and blonde, is about the only feature that looks the same as his aging publicity photo. But he has been close to glory: "I was up for the role of Cliff on \Matlock,\ " he tells a cook. "But they felt I was a little too strong for
Andy Griffith
." Jimmy\s best friend is William 
Christian Slater
", a harmless, dim-witted street person who plays the sidekick in Jimmys nonstop talk show. Life is a monologue for Jimmy, who has opinions on everything, from the mummy movies on the late show to the Hollywood epidemic of street crime. One day the car radio is stolen from Jimmys beater, and when Jimmy finds out that the cops dont much care, he decides to become a video vigilante. Hell capture the perps on videotape."
That sets up the story gimmick in "Jimmy Hollywood," which is that Jimmy teams up with William to tape the bad guys, send the tapes to TV stations, and represent himself as a shadowy vigilante organization named "S.O.S." - which stands for "Save Our Streets" and is inspired, he explains, by the initials of "Steven O. Selznick," whose name was David, but why sweat the details? Leadership of the S.O.S. is the greatest role in Jimmy Alto\s life, and he plays it to the hilt, monopolizing the Los Angeles media with a crimestoppers campaign that grows more daring and dangerous.
Lorraine 
Victoria Abril
, his longsuffering Latina girlfriend, thinks he has taken leave of his senses, which of course he has, but the movie knows that an unemployed actor who thinks he has finally found a great role cannot be reasoned with.
"Jimmy Hollywood" was written and directed by Barry Levinson "Rainman," "
Good Morning, Vietnam
", who has probably had a lot of Jimmy Altos through his office. In Pesci, Slater and Abril he has actors who find the right tone for the material. But the plot weighs them down. They\d be at home in a human comedy about their dreams and other ways of killing time. When they get caught up in the whirlwind of Levinson\s plot mechanism, they lose their goofy street credibility and become characters in a sitcom: Events drive them, and the scale of the story escalates, until finally nothing can be believed - which is a shame, because for the first hour we believed in them.
John Cassavetes
knew how to make movies like this without letting the plot take over. His "
Minnie and Moskowitz
" was about a lonely museum curator 
Gena Rowlands
 and a parking lot attendant 
Seymour Cassel
", and Moskowitz could be Jimmy Altos first cousin: A guy on the outside physically, but on the inside in his mind. The whole point of such characters is that they drift. And it is important that they drift in a recognizable version of real life romanticized, to be sure."
"Jimmy Hollywood" goes wrong when Jimmy starts pulling off stunts that would make you famous in the movies but would get you killed in real life. Once the story cuts loose from its base of realism, it doesn\t much matter what happens; Jimmy, William and Lorraine, who seemed so real in her cluttered apartment, become plot devices, not people.
"Too bad. I felt my heart sinking when I saw the plot machinery gearing up. Theres probably a theory that audiences demand heavy plotting - that unless theres some kind of dumb manipulated crisis as a climax, theyll lose interest. I wonder how valid that is."
"Todays audiences have been exposed to so many hours of TV and film that they can sense it when a movie cuts loose from its convictions and goes on automatic pilot. Here are characters who might have really amounted to something, and we can see the movie dying right under their feet."

Cross My Heart 1987 Cast
Martin Short as David
"Annette OToole" as Kathy
Paul Reiser as Bruce
Joanna Kerns as Nancy
Lee Arenberg as Parking lot attendant
Jessica Puscas as Jessica
Directed by Armyan Bernstein
Produced by Lawrence Kasdan
Screenplay by Bernstein
Gail Parent Photographed by
Thomas Del Ruth Edited by
Mia Goldman Music by
Bruce Broughton Comedy, Romance
Rated R "Cross My Heart" begins with
Martin Short
and
"Annette OToole"
"preparing themselves for going out together on a third date, an experience they both apparently equate with being locked in a small room with hungry rats. Its not that they dont like each other. On the contrary, they both feel they may actually be falling in love, and that the other person may be Right for them. Thats the problem: Both Short and OToole have told so many lies on the first two dates that they dont see how they can start telling the truth now."
"Short has claimed he is about to be appointed regional sales manager of his firm, which sells sunglasses. In fact, he has just been fired. OToole has neglected to reveal that she smokes and has a 7-year-old daughter. Desperate to impress, Short picks up OToole in a car that is not his own and tries to lure her back to a garishly stylish apartment, also not his own. The entire evening is a fragile construction of lies that threatens to come crashing down at any moment."
What director
Armyan Bernstein
does with this premise is courageous and ambitious, but only fitfully successful. Bernstein, who co-wrote the script with
Gail Parent
, commits the long central passage of his film to an extended duet in the borrowed apartment, where Short inveigles O\Toole into bed, not exactly against her will, and the two of them earn a footnote in cinematic history by becoming the first characters in a major movie to discuss and use condoms. They are refreshingly frank about their choice of brands, but otherwise maintain their lies to orgasm and beyond. "It was a great little climax," O\Toole unhelpfully reassures Short.
"These are the sorts of roles actors will kill for. Short and OToole are on screen for almost the whole movie and are called upon to bare their souls and bodies, engage in meaningful conversation, laugh, cry, and star in slapstick and action sequences. It is always a pleasure to watch them, especially since Bernstein is giving both actors an opportunity to sound notes that have usually been denied to them."
Short, who is so much more than the Ed Grimley character he made famous on Saturday Night Live, comes across as an engaging, intelligent and actually sexy leading man, in the
Dudley Moore
mold. O\Toole, one of Hollywood\s most unfairly overlooked actresses, ever since "
One on One
," is engaging, intelligent and astonishingly sexy. And both of them can play comedy, especially with each other.
"So wheres the flaw in the movie? I think its in all of the apparatus that the screenplay erects around their lies. Although it is plausible that strangers would lie to each other and inevitable that a moment of truth would have to come, Bernstein and Parent belabor the lies their characters tell until they become counterproductive. Up to a point, we are able to believe that OToole believes Short really lives in the vulgar apartment they visit. But eventually the evidence against this particular lie becomes so inescapable that the screenplay can maintain the deception only by descending to the level of the Idiot Plot - the story device by which secrets are kept only because all of the characters are idiots."
"There is another flaw, I think, at a point after most of OTooles lies have been exposed but Short still has a few left. Because the two characters like each other very much, I thought the logical flow of the movie called for Short to confess his deceptions. Instead, he lashes out in anger at OToole, while still trying to keep his own secrets. The behavior is too hypocritical for a comedy."
The result is that "Cross My Heart" does the one thing that no romantic comedy should ever do: It causes us to lose confidence in one of the characters, and sympathy with the other one, fairly late in the story. All that spinning of the wheels of the plot also denies us the payoff we expect in a movie like this, which is the real love scene, in which the characters are allowed to be warm and forgiving after all of the loose ends have been tidied up.

Dead Presidents 1995 Cast
Larenz Tate as Anthony Curtis
Keith David as Kirby
Chris Tucker as Skip
Rose Jackson as Juanita
Produced and Directed by Allen
Albert Hughes Written by
Michael Henry Brown Based On A Story by
The Hughes Brothers Action, Crime, Drama, History
Rated R For Strong Violence, Language, A Sex Scene and Some Drug Use
121 minutes "Dead Presidents" suggests that the Hughes Brothers, whose great film "
Menace II Society
" 1993 was finished when they were only 21, are born filmmakers. They have a sure sense of the camera, of actors, of the life within a scene. But they are not as sure when it comes to story and meaning, and here is a film that feels incomplete, as if its last step is into thin air. Scene by scene you feel its skill, but you leave the theater wondering about the meaning of it all.
The new film, set in the late \60s, follows, like "Menace II Society," several years in the life of a young black man who is not evil, but who finds himself drifting into crime and trouble. While the earlier film tried to explain that drift, this one is more passive; Anthony 
Larenz Tate
, "O-Dog" in "Menace" keeps so much to himself that by the end, as the bullets are flying, we don\t understand how or why he would be involved in an armed robbery. There are, to be sure, some of the usual reasons: He was exposed to violence in Vietnam, he can\t find work, he has started to drink, his wife nags him because he can\t support his family. All causes for unhappiness and frustration, yes, but they don\t convincingly lead to the film\s conclusion, which plays more like the flashy climax of a caper movie.
"The earlier scenes are the best, as Anthony grows up in a supportive Bronx family. He earns money helping a milkman did they still have those in the late 60s? and then working as a numbers runner for Kirby "
Keith David
, the local pool-hall operator. Kirby has an artificial leg, and I liked the way the humor builds in a scene where he goes to collect money, gets in a fight and finds it hilarious that his opponent goes for the wrong leg.
"Another of the movies best scenes, gentle and true to life, shows him making love for the first time to his girlfriend, Juanita "
Rose Jackson
. The scene begins with him finding Kleenex stuffed inside her bra "It don\t matter" and continues as he clumsily tries to figure out what to do next "That\s not it," she whispers. This scene is much truer than the standard movie scenes of first-time lovers, who inevitably perform like endurance champions. It shows what the brothers Allen and Albert do best: capturing the truth of ordinary life.
Anthony\s parents want him to go to college, but he enlists in the Marines, and there is an extended center section of convincing war footage, including atrocities committed by both sides. Asked by his mother if he picked up any "bad habits," he says, "No, ma, except a little killing - for my country, of course." He discovers that Juanita has had a baby, and joins her when he comes home to the Bronx, although he is enraged by a pimp who helps to support her. He gets a job in a meat market, but when the market closes, he is left broke, unemployed, with another child on the way.
"Thats when he joins with Kirby, some of his Vietnam buddies, and his revolutionary sister-in-law "
"NBushe Wright"
 in an elaborate scheme to steal thousands of used bills "dead presidents" from a U.S.
Treasury truck.
It\s here the movie goes off the rails. Many of the details are wrong, but I\ll mention just three. Is it likely that a young woman who has never committed a crime before would shoot a cop several times with little provocation? Is it likely that the gang\s disguises would look like fanciful mime makeup? Is it possible that several cops can be killed in an extended gun battle at a Federal Reserve Bank without a quick police response? More to the point, is it likely that Anthony\s life would lead to this sequence of events? I don\t think so. It\s as if the Hughes Brothers have led us into the wrong story. I wanted to know more about Anthony, more about his thoughts and feelings. I was reminded of Oliver Stone\s "
Born on the Fourth of July
," which also follows a young man into and out of Vietnam, and knows him so much better.
Leaving the theater, I wondered what statement the movie thought it had made about Anthony. Was it inevitable that he would turn to crime? If so, was it likely he would turn to an elaborate caper scheme, instead of a more routine stickup like the unforgettable robbery at the grocery store in "Menace II Society"? At the end, when he stands in court and expects sympathy because of his service in Vietnam, are we supposed to forget the crime scene, littered with bodies? These are questions the Hughes Brothers might have asked at the screenplay stage. The inevitable information that their story is "based on real events" doesn\t help; our understanding of it is based only on the events on the screen. They show in "Dead Presidents" that they can direct with confidence and joy, but that they need more experience and thoughtfulness with the plot. Maybe, at 24, that\s not so bad.

Paternity 1981 Rated PG
94 minutes Burt Reynolds
"seems to have\r\ntwo basic screen characters, which, for ease of classification, we can describe\r\nas Bad Burt and Good Reynolds. Bad Burt is a mean ol boy who tools around the\r\nSouthland in a souped-up sports car, infuriating sheriffs and making Sally\r\nField cry. Good Reynolds, however, is a guy who used to be macho and heartless,\r\nbut has grown into a sensitive, caring kinda guy who is trying to build bridges\r\nto women and children."
“Paternity” gives us the good guy. The Reynolds\r\ncharacter is a lot like the man he played in “
Starting Over
"” and maybe a little\r\nbit in “Hooper,” a guy torn between a self-image as a ladies man and a desire\r\nto grow more sensitive. This time, hes the manager of Madison Square Garden,\r\nand he leads a lonely but he thinks idyllic existence as a New York playboy.\r\nHes got a date every night, but theres nobody to come home to. And when he\r\nshoots baskets with a friends son, he begins to realize that he would like to\r\nhave a son, too. Not a family, mind you. And certainly not a wife. But a son.\r\nHe sends out feelers for a surrogate mother. All the candidates are impossible\r\nor have braces on their teeth. Then he stumbles across a pretty blonde waitress\r\nin a restaurant where he has lunch. Shes a music student, wants to study in Paris,\r\nand will bear his child for a one-time payment of $50,000 considerably higher\r\nthan market price, I believe."
The waitress is played by
"Beverly DAngelo"
. She\r\nwas the rich kid in HAIR and Patsy Cline in “Coal Miner’s Daughter.” She is\r\nwonderful in this movie, soft and warm and understanding. Of course, we know\r\nalthough Good Reynolds is slow to catch on that they will eventually fall in\r\nlove. God knows Burt tries to hold out and play the playboy role, but\r\neventually even his sexy dates such as
Elizabeth Ashley
"start to like DAngelo\r\nand to lay a guilt trip on Reynolds."
But a-ha, you are thinking, I have given the\r\nplot away. Well, yes and no. I have given the plot away in one sense, but in\r\nanother sense this movie drives us to the edges of our seat with maddening\r\nfrustration because it is so slow to give itself away. “Paternity” is\r\nabsolutely predictable at every moment. Stop the film at any point, and nine\r\nout of ten viewers could correctly predict what was going to happen next.
"The movie has another flaw. It takes its\r\ncharacters just a little too evenly. Although the movie was directed by David\r\nSteinberg, a comic actor with a good sense of timing, “Paternitys” timing is\r\nso slowpaced and stately that there are times when this doesnt feel like a\r\ncomedy, it feels like a historical romance. People speak at a measured pace;\r\nthey move through scenes as if preprograrnmed; they do not contain the passion\r\nand surprise you would expect in a story dealing with matters of sex and life\r\nand identity. Too bad. Burt Reynolds can be a most engaging actor; the movie\r\nsurrounds him with other convincing actors such as"
Paul Dooley
and
Norman Fell
;\r\nElizabeth Ashley does some nice things with her small role. But “Paternity” is\r\nso preordained. It fulfills every one of our expectations with a deadening\r\nsafeness. It is about a man who wants a child so that he will leave something\r\nafter himself, but it never convinces us that he has a self to leave.

La Chevre 1985 Cast
Pierre Richard as Francois Perrin
Gerard Depardieu as Campana
Corynne Charbit as Marie Bens
Michael Robin Meyer as Mr. Bens
Pedro Armendariz, Jr. as Andre Valardy Custao
Directed by Francis Veber
Produced by Alain Poire
Screenplay by Veber
Music by Vladimir Cosma
Photographed by Alex Phillips
Pierre Richard
is the goofy-looking French actor whose movie "The Tall Blonde Man with One Red Shoe" was remade as a Hollywood comedy named "The Man with One Black Shoe," or maybe it was the other way around, and his shoe was black and the other guy\s was red. The other guy was not tall. That I know for sure. He was played by
Tom Hanks
, who is a good actor but not a tall actor, although as the man with one shoe he was neither tall nor good. And now what has me worried is "La Chevre," the latest Pierre Richard comedy. If I have to sit through a Hollywood remake of this one, I am likely to be the man of medium height who threw his shoe through the screen.
Richard plays a man who has very bad luck. He falls into holes and walks into doors and sits in chairs that collapse beneath him. When the daughter of a rich industrialist disappears in Mexico, a psychologist suggests that Richard be used to help find her.
The reason? She also has incredibly bad luck, and so, with his luck, perhaps he might stumble across her. This theory is explained to
Gerard Depardieu
", a detective who is assigned to take Richard to Mexico and follow him around. Well, its a simple premise, but then many good comedies have simple premises. There was a fleeting instant, early in this film, when I allowed myself to think that it might work. Richard is invited into a room and asked to take a seat. One of the many chairs is broken, and, of course, that is the chair he chooses. Because the outcome of the scene was completely inevitable and yet the gag was exquisitely protracted, it was funny when the chair collapsed."
But the movie never again approached that modest comic level except once, when Richard has the misfortune to be carried off by a gorilla. The two lads fly off to Mexico to search for the missing woman, and they end up inside the shabbiest Acapulco bordello yet captured on film. As Richard was being molested by an ambitious Mexican call girl, I was reminded of a clipping I saw recently from the Los Angeles Reader, which was about "Cinema\s Greatest Paradox." I share it with you: The French are funny.
Sex is funny.
And comedies are funny.
Yet no French sex comedies are funny. That pretty much says it all. "La Chevre" was inspired by the great box office success of "Comperes," the last comedy teaming Richard and Depardieu. I didn\t think it was funny, either. Nor did I like "The Tall Blonde Man With One Red, Black Shoe" all that much. In this film, there is a moment when Richard loses his shoe. I think that is what is known as an in-joke. In a movie like this, you take whatever jokes you can get, wherever you can find them.

Sleepers 1996 Cast
Kevin Bacon as Sean Nokes
Robert De Niro as Father Bobby
Dustin Hoffman as Danny Snyder
Jason Patric as Shakes
Brad Pitt as Michael
Minnie Driver as Carol
Written and Directed by Barry Levinson
Based On The Book by Lorenzo Carcaterra
Crime, Drama Rated R
For Language, Graphic Violence and Two Scenes Of Strong Sexual Content 149 minutes
"The opening words of Barry Levinsons “Sleepers” are, “This is a\rtrue story about friendship that runs deeper than blood.” Thats careless\rwriting; how, exactly, does it run deeper than blood, and how deep is blood?\rBut after seeing the film the words I remembered were, “This is a true story.”\rI doubt it is anything of the kind, and Lorenzo Carcaterras novel, which\rinspired the movie, has been convincingly attacked on its claim to be based on\rfact."
"All\rmovies are in some way fiction, so what does it matter? The Coen Brothers “"
Fargo
"”\rclaimed to be based on a true story, and they admit it wasnt; the “true story”\rbit at the beginning was just a stylistic device. With “Sleepers,” however, the\rclaim is meant seriously, and that bothers me, because it shows moral decisions\rbeing made which, in the real world, would have had real results."
"The\rfilm tells the story of four friends from the west side of New York--Hells\rKitchen--and how they grow up in a tough but protective neighborhood, where the\rmoral poles are Father Bobby "
Robert De Niro
" and King Benny Vittorio\rGassman, the Mafia boss. When the kids are 13, they steal a hot dog wagon and\rit rolls down subway steps and crushes a man. Theyre sentenced to a\rreformatory where they are tortured and sexually assaulted by a sadistic guard\rnamed Nokes "
Kevin Bacon
.
Now\rI will have to reveal plot points. There is a flash-forward to the summer of\r1981. Two of the boys, now about 28 and gangsters themselves, walk into a\rrestaurant, see Nokes, and shoot him to death. They are brought to trial. But\rone of the original four, Shakes 
Jason Patric
 now works for a newspaper.\rAnother, Michael 
Brad Pitt
, is an assistant D.A. They fashion a scheme in\rwhich Michael will try the case in such a way that their two old friends will\rbeat the rap.
"“Words\rlike `payback time and `revenge came to mind,” Shakes, the narrator, tells\rus. King Benny, still running the neighborhood, arranges for an alcoholic\rlawyer named Snyder "
Dustin Hoffman
 to defend the killers because he can be\rordered to follow the script. Everything depends on the willingness of good\rFather Bobby to provide the defendants with an alibi.
"On\rthe surface, this is a story about justified revenge. Dig a little deeper and\rit gets complicated. The two defendants have become professional mobsters and\rkillers. After their trial, they go back to killing. The priest observes, “I\rknow what they were and I know what they are and its not about that.” The\rmovies real subject is a homophobic revenge fantasy, which it justifies with\rthe Cosa Nostra version of honor."
"Consider\rthe priest. Nothing in the film indicates he is anything other than absolutely\rtruthful, upright and moral. When hes asked to perjure himself, there is an\reffective shot: The camera remains on De Niro in closeup, while he thinks, and\rthinks. The next time we see him is on the witness stand. In a movie flowing\rwith dialogue, he is not given a single word to explain his decision, possibly\rbecause the filmmakers know it cannot be explained--anything he says would\rexpose the shallow morality."
"Father\rBobby must know “his” boys are killers themselves--doing to others worse than\rwhat was done unto them unless homosexual rape is worse than death, a notion\rthe movie flirts with. Father Bobbys church and faith are unequivocal: Murder\ris wrong, revenge is wrong, two wrongs do not make a right. What the movie is\rarguing, when Father Bobby lies on the stand, is that the mob-oriented “values”\rof the “neighborhood” run deeper and take precedence over the values of the\rpriests faith."
So\rwhat we really have here is a situation in which the pop culture version of the\rMafia code, as popularized by the evangelist
Mario Puzo
"and elaborated by his\racolytes like Carcaterra, is valued above traditional morality. If you doubt\rthat the movie depends on homophobia to justify its morality, ask yourself: If\rthe boys had been beaten but not sexually molested, would the movie play the\rsame way? Would the priest arrive at the same decision? Would the verdict seem\ras justified? Its necessary to discuss the underlying morality of “Sleepers”\rbecause the movie so smugly tries to exploit it without acknowledging it. That\rsaid, I must report this is a pretty good movie on more superficial levels.\rDustin Hoffman gives a fine, subtle, quavering performance as the shaky defense\rlawyer who asks his questions so quietly that one witness cannot quite believe\rwhat is happening to him. Kevin Bacon is a strong, effective villain. Robert De\rNiro is used more for his aura than his skills, but makes Father Bobby into the\rmost believable character in the movie."
Jason\rPatric and Brad Pitt, as the two conspirators, seem more like Woodward and\rBernstein in “
"All the Presidents Men"
"” than like former West Side Boys, but\rthats how stars are useful: By casting their roles with stars and casting the\rtwo defendants with unknowns, the movie tilts us toward the success of the plot\rand away from the guilt of the killers."
"I\rliked the way the film evoked Hells Kitchen; there is a whiff of Martin\rScorseses “"
Mean Streets
".” Some of the supporting performances--especially\rGassmans--were colorful. The courtroom scene works, as most courtroom scenes\rdo. As entertainment, the movie functions successfully. But I dont believe the\rstory is true--not true to the facts, and not true to the morality it pretends\rto be about."

Wordplay 2006 Directed by
Patrick Creadon Written by
Creadon "Christine OMalley"
Documentary Rated NR
94 minutes The movie centers on the 28th annual American Crossword Puzzle Tournament, hosted every year in Stamford, Conn., by Will Shortz, the editor of the
New York Times
crossword puzzles. It also visits fans of the Times puzzles which run in the
Sun-Times
and countless other papers. These include Bill Clinton, Bob Dole,
Jon Stewart
,
Ken Burns
, Yankee pitcher Mike Mussina and the Indigo Girls, although they missed my friend Dusty Cohl, who descends into a deep mental well once a day and does not emerge until the puzzle has been completed I think "filled in" is not the approved terminology.
The film is made with a lot of style and visual ingenuity.
Patrick Creadon
, the director, uses graphics to show us crossword grids with the problem areas highlighted, and then we see the letters being written in. In one especially ingenious montage, he has all of his celebrities working on the same puzzle in interlocking shots. During the final championship round, with three contenders working on giant crosswords on a stage, he makes their progress easy to follow; I can imagine another film in which it would have been incomprehensible.
"You have to be very well-informed to be a crossword puzzle champion. Scrabble and spelling bees require knowledge of a lot of words, but crosswords require unlimited facts, encyclopedic knowledge, and an ability to figure out the authors unstated assumptions about the nature of the clues. The puzzles can be tricky; both Dole and Clinton remember that on the day after their presidential campaign, one clue asked for the name of the winner. Diabolically, the correct seven-letter word could be either CLINTON or BOBDOLE."
All of these people think Merl Reagle is about the best crossword author now active. Mike Mussina, the pitcher, says solving a Reagle puzzle "is like pitching to Barry Bonds." Jon Stewart laments that the
Times
has banished certain words, including those involving bodily functions: "Words like
urine
and
enema,"
he says, "are terrific, because they pack a lot of vowels in five letters." We meet some of the stars in the crossword world, including a former champ, Trip Payne, and 20-year-old Tyler Hinman, who is the kid to watch. We also absorb the sense of a family reunion at the crossword tournament; the annual talent show is so democratic, it includes baton twirling.
Will Shortz has been the god of this world since he founded the tournament, shortly after taking over as editor of the
Times
puzzles. How do you prepare for such a career? He went to Indiana University, which permits students to design their own majors, and got a degree in "enigmatology." He created the rules for the annual tournament.
"The final championship round is incredibly intense. Not only do the finalists stand onstage in front of big boards that everyone can see, but they wear headphones that pump music at them, so they cant hear clues or comments from the audience. There is a finalist this time who rips off his headphones, throws them to the ground and uses a banished word involving a bodily function, and believe me, he has his reasons."

One on One 1977 Cast
Robby Benson as Henry Steele
"Annette OToole" as Janet Hays
G.D. Spradlin as Coach Smith
Gail Strickland as B.J. Rudolph
James G. Richardson as Malcolm
Hector Morales as Gonzales
Cory Faucher as Tom
Melanie Griffith as Hitchhiker
Directed by Lamont Johnson
Produced by Martin Hornstein
Photographed by Donald M. Morgan
Edited by Robbe Roberts
Music by Charles Fox
Lyrics by Paul Williams
Drama, Sports Film Rated PG
"Heres a real discovery, an engaging comedy that opened without a lot of fanfare but is drawing crowds as the word spreads: “One On One” is funny and touching and makes you feel good. The movies concocted out of story ingredients as old as the hills small-\xadtown boy enters big-city university, hopes to make the team and win the girl, but its acted with such grace and good humor that we really care about what happens."
"Thats not to say the movies perfect. It owes more than a little to “"
The Graduate
” and “
Rocky
,” and there are a couple of scenes awkward enough to make us squirm. But it has heart, and the immediately engaging personalities of
Robby Benson
and
"Annette OToole"
in the leading roles. And it has that rare commodity, a villain who is both totally despicable and human enough to inspire sympathy.
Benson is the 21-year-old who played Billy Joe McAllister in “
Ode to Billy Joe
"” and jumped off the Tallahatchie Bridge under circumstances that are still, for my money, cloaked in mystery. In “One On One”, which he co-authored, he plays a naive high-school basketball star from Colorado whos recruited by a big university Benson in real life is a terrific basketball player and does his own playing in the movie. Hes only 5 feet 10 inches, but hes a dazzling play-maker and the coach thinks he might be usable."
Ah: The coach. He\s played by G.D. Sprad\xadlin the corrupt senator in "
The Godfather, Part II
" as a hard-nosed ace recruiter with a heart of Drano. He welcomes young Robby into the system, which functions well at first as a prospective varsity star, he gets a tutor, an alumnus big brother, a “job” and a weekly paycheck. But Robby doesn\t fit. He tries hard, yes, and he\s talented, but he\s so small\xad-town that he can\t deal with things like uppers and downers and promiscuous depart\xadmental secretaries, and so the coach asks him to give up his scholarship.
"He refuses, and the battle lines are drawn. One of the recruits on Robbys side turns out to be his tutor, an auburn-haired sociology grad student. Shes played by Annette OToole, whom I have not seen before and would very much like to see again; her first impact on the screen is roughly equivalent to Katherine Ross entrance in “The Graduate”."
"What happens in the movie, as Ive suggested, is not exactly new stuff. The kid engages in a battle of wills with the coach, he discovers his own values, he does a lot of quick growing up and he falls in love with the girl. What makes the movie such a treasure is the way this material is handled. The way, for example, Robby Benson silently mouths the word “Wow!” after learning that the gorgeous grad student is asking him to move into her apartment. The scene in which he plays basketball with berserk energy after taking speed for the first time. The closing scenes, with their reminders of “Rocky”."
"Some of the stuff doesnt work. A confrontation between Benson, Miss OToole and her former boy friend the bearded assistant professor for whom she is also a teaching assistant is written very awkwardly, and works at all only because the acting over\xadcomes the weaknesses in the dialog. And in the movies early scenes Benson is supposed to be a naive small-town kid, yes, but was anyone ever quite this naive? Those are flaws, but we forgive, them. “One On One” is a sleeper that might take off, or might not: While its in town, give it a chance before you check out the current crop of yawn-inspiring blockbusters."

Major Payne 1995 Cast
Damon Wayans as Major Payne
Karyn Parsons as Dr. Emily Walburn
Steven Martini as Cadet Alex Stone
Directed by Nick Castle
Comedy, Family Rated PG-13
For Language, Some Crude Humor and Behavior 97 minutes
Major Payne likes to think of himself as a killing machine. That\s why he\s devastated to be passed over for promotion and mustered out of the service. Surely, he begs his commanding officer, there must be another war to fight? Somebody else to kill? "Sorry, Payne," he\s told. "There\s nobody else to kill. You\ve killed them all." Back in civilian life and unemployed, he tries out for the police force, but gets carried away during a "real life simulation" and hammers an actor who is portraying a perpetrator. Then an old friend finds him a job, as the officer in charge of the junior ROTC cadet training corps at a private school in Virginia. This is not the job he was born to fill.
Payne is played in the movie by
Damon Wayans
, in the best work he\s done since the inspired "In Living Color" TV series.
"Although the plot of the movie is a familiar formula, the dialogue and performance are not; its a smart, funny job of poking fun at all those movies where sadistic drill instructors terrorized their green recruits."
"In this case, according to the schools doddering headmaster a bug collector played by"
William Hickey
", the recruits are literally green: They wear green uniforms, he knows, but hes not sure exactly why. The only person on the school faculty with a clue about real life is a cute teacher named Dr. Emily Walburn "
Karyn Parsons
, who makes Payne get all mushy-mouthed when she sweet-talks him.
The members of the junior ROTC corps are your usual mixed big, even more mixed: There must be a three-foot difference in height between the shortest and the tallest, and when Payne screams at one of them, "What\s the matter, cadet? Are you deaf?" the answer, of course, is that he is deaf. That doesn\t faze Payne, who relies on the kid\s lip-reading skills to get his harrowing threats across.
One of the funny things about the movie is that the dialogue of the Payne character is truly artful in its ability to paint horrifying pictures and utter dire insults. When Dr. Walburn asks him, at one point, if he understands "positive reinforcement," Payne nods and says, "Is that like when you break the neck of a POW after torturing him, so he doesn\t have to spend the rest of his life with a colostomy bag?" Hmmm. Reading through that line, I can see how it might not sound howlingly funny, out of context. The context is the key to the character in this film: Wayans presents Payne as a tunnel-visioned "killing machine" who applies his values as single-mindedly to school kids as to recruits on a practice range. "War has made me very paranoid," he says, "and when a man gets to eyeballing me too much, it makes my Agent Orange act up." And when his cadets complain about conditions in the Quonset hut they\re expected to occupy, he buries them up to their necks in mud, to make them grateful for their former quarters. Even more terrifying is his personal interpretation of "The Little Engine that Could." The key to this kind of comedy is to go all the way with it, and Wayans creates a comic character out of narrowness, obsession, and blind commitment. Of course the arc of the storyline is familiar; we know the pretty teacher will soften him, and that he will grow fond of the cadets, and no prizes for guessing who wins the big all-Virginia ROTC competition.
Wayans is one of the most talented comic actors around, especially when he lets go and swings for the fences. In some of his earlier film work, including "Mo\ Money" 1992, he was softening the edges too much. His best work, including the "Men on Film" segments of "In Living Color," depend on outrageous behavior, and as Major Payne he is plenty outrageous.

Simon Magus 2001 Cast
Noah Taylor as Simon
Stuart Townsend as Dovid
Rutger Hauer as Squire
Ian Holm as Sirius/Boris
Written and Directed by Ben Hopkins
Rated NR 106 minutes
If there\s anything worse than a laborious fable with a moral, it\s the laborious fable without the moral. The more I think about "Simon Magus," the less I\m sure what it\s trying to say. It leads us through a mystical tale about Jews, Poles and an outcast who takes orders from Satan.
"Both groups would like to build the local railroad station, but the outcast, a mystic, has visions of these very tracks being used to take Jews to the death camps. Does that mean it doesnt matter who builds the station, because the trains will still perform their tragic task? In that case, whats the story about, except bleak irony? The movie takes place in 19th century Silesia, bordering Hungary and Austria. Some 20 Orthodox Jews have a small community near a larger gentile town. The new railroad bypassing the town has created hard times for everyone. A Jew named Dovid "
Stuart Townsend
 wants to build a station and some shops, which will help out the woman he loves, a widowed shopkeeper named Leah 
Embeth Davidtz
. A gentile named Hase 
Sean McGinley
 also wants to build the station. The land is controlled by the squire 
Rutger Hauer
, a dreamy intellectual.
This would be a story about anti-Semitism and real estate, were it not for two other characters. Simon 
Noah Taylor
 is a Jew who is scorned by his own community because of his crazy ways. From time to time, as he makes his way through the gloomy mists of the town and forest, he is approached by Sirius 
Ian Holm
", who seems to be the devil. When Satan appears in a movie, I always look around for God, but rarely find him; its usually up to the human characters to defeat the devil. In this case, Simons visions of the death trains perhaps suggest that God is taking a century off."
The non-supernatural side of the story involves the good Dovid and the bad Hase a villain so obvious he lacks only a mustache to twirl. Both want the squire to make his land available. The squire, a lonely and bookish man, wants intellectual companionship, someone to read his poems and keep him company around the fire on long winter evenings. Dovid, a talmudic scholar but not otherwise widely read, takes lessons from Sarah Amanda Ryan, who is up on poetry. At one point, she and the squire get into a literature-quoting contest.
"Simon Magus" creates a sinister subplot in which the evil Hase tries to trick Simon into taking a box with a Christian baby inside and hiding it in the rabbi\s house, so that a mob can discover it as proof that the Jews plan to eat it. Simon responds with intelligence that surprises us, but what good purpose does it do to resurrect this slander? Most people now alive would never hear of such ancient anti-Semitic calumnies were it not for movies opposing them. Does
Ben Hopkins
", the writer-director, imagine audiences nodding sagely as they learn that baby eating was a myth spread by anti-Semites? Isnt it better to allow such lies to disappear into the mists of the past? The story is resolved along standard melodramatic lines, and good you will not be surprised to learn triumphs. Yet still those death trains approach inexorably through Simons visions. The papers are filled these days with stories of Polish villagers who rounded up their local Jews and burned them alive. What difference does it make who builds the train station?"

What Happened Was... 1994 Cast
Karen Sillas as Jackie
Tom Noonan as Michael
Written and Directed by Tom Noonan
Comedy, Drama, Romance Rated NR
90 minutes I am drawn to movies in which we simply wait to see what the characters will do next, aware that they are not driven by the requirements of a plot. "What Happened Was..." begins like that, with a woman in her 30s coming home to her apartment, opening a box, taking out a cake, listening to her answering machine, and waiting for someone to arrive. Here is a movie that could go almost anywhere, and I found myself waiting with anticipation.
She has some wine ready. It may be important to her; may ease her way through a long evening. Her guest arrives. He is a tall, cadaverous man clutching a briefcase as if it might deflect her in an emergency. The evening settles into its cadence: These two people know each other from a law office, where neither one is very far up the corporate ladder, and after sizing each other up for months they have arrived at this first date.
She is an executive assistant. He is a paralegal, with a chip on his shoulder about the firm\s lawyers. He, after all, went to Harvard and is an intellectual, and is in fact writing a book about the firm. He seems to take notes for it all the time. Edgily, awkwardly, they talk around the evening\s obvious topics, which are: Do we like one another? Is sex a possibility? Will there be a second date? Does this other person have problems greater than my own? "What Happened Was..." is a film written and directed by
Tom Noonan
, who also plays the man, named Michael. You may have seen him in movies like "
Robocop 2
" or "Manhunter," playing an odd, sinister figure. In this film, he plays a character who looks as if he would be typecast in such roles, but has a great deal of depth.
She is not without sympathy: "At the office, they call you \Mr.\xa0Strange,\ " she says. "I just told them you were insecure." Her name is Jackie, and she is played by
Karen Sillas
. As the evening continues, we grow aware that she is probably the stronger and more competent of the two, and that she knows that, but is willing to compromise that knowledge if he will express even the smallest willingness to enter into a relationship. This he seems unable to do. "It seems like something broke in me a long time ago," he tells her. Later, she says, "At one point, guys just stopped asking me out. I don\t know if it was my age, or I gave off this serious vibe. Just when I had something interesting to say, nobody wanted to hear it." The dialogue is filled with hesitations, retrenchings, awkward wordings: "That magazine The New Yorker. Do you know that magazine?" He reveals that he thinks he has heard his name hidden in a Beatles song. At one point in the evening, she seems to grow careless about the neckline of her dress, but by the end of the evening it is back where it belongs. Then there are revelations, too late to save or change very much.
"What Happened Was..." is in many ways an admirable movie, and Noonan and Sillas do a quiet, thorough job of representing these two people who seem on the edge of being walled up inside their own walls. There are many small moments of perfect observation. But I never really felt they were building to anything, or heading anywhere. I didn\t feel chemistry between the characters - not the chemistry of attraction, of course, but not even the chemistry of mutual awareness. Both of them were playing their own tapes. It\s an interesting film, and a brave effort. But there\s something missing.

Maborosi 1997 Cast
Makiko Esumi as Yumiko
Directed by Hirokazu Kore-eda
Written by Yoshihisa Ogita
Based On A Story by Teru Miyamoto
Drama, Foreign, Thriller Rated NR
Suitable For Mature Audiences; Mild Nudity 110 minutes
"Maborosi" is a Japanese film of astonishing beauty and sadness, the story of a woman whose happiness is destroyed in an instant by an event that seems to have no reason. Time passes, she picks up some of the pieces, and she is even distracted sometimes by happiness. But at her center is a void, a great unanswered question.
The woman, named Yumiko, is played by the fashion model
Makiko Esumi
. Models are not always good actresses, but Esumi is the right choice for this role. Tall, slender and grave, she brings a great stillness to the screen. Her character speaks little; many shots show her seated in thought, absorbed in herself. She is dressed always in long, dark dresses - no pants or jeans - and she becomes, after a while, like a figure in an opera that has no song.
She is 20 when we meet her. She is happily, playfully married to Ikuo 
Tadanobu Asano
. They have a little boy, and there is a sunny scene in which she bathes him. Then an inexplicable event takes place, and she is widowed.
Five years pass, and then a match-maker finds a husband for her: Tamio 
Takashi Naito
, who lives with his young daughter in an isolated fishing village. At 25, she starts her life again.
This is the first film by Hirokazu Koreeda, a young Japanese director whose love for the work of the great
Yasujiro Ozu
1903-63 is evident. Ozu is one of the four or five greatest directors of all time, and some of his visual touches are visible here. The camera, for example, is often placed at the eye level of someone kneeling on a tatami mat. Shots begin or end on empty rooms. Characters speak while seated side by side, not looking at one another. There are many long shots and few closeups; the camera does not move, but regards.
In more obvious homage, Koreeda uses a technique that Ozu himself borrowed from Japanese poetry: the "pillow shot," inspired by "pillow words," which are words that do not lead out of or into the rest of the poem but provide a resting place -- a pause or punctuation. Koreeda frequently cuts away from the action to simply look for a moment at something: a street, a doorway, a shop front, a view. And there are two small touches in which the young director subtly acknowledges the master: a characteristic teakettle in the foreground of a shot, and a scene in which the engine of a canal boat makes a sound so uncannily similar to the boat at the beginning of Ozu\s "
Floating Weeds
" 1959 that it might have been lifted from the soundtrack.
But what, you are asking, do these details have to do with the movie at hand? I mention them because they indicate the care with which this beautiful film has been made, and they suggest its tradition. "Maborosi" is not going to insult us with a simple-minded plot. It is not a soap opera. Sometimes life presents us with large, painful, unanswerable questions, and we cannot simply "get over them." There isn\t a shot in the movie that\s not graceful and pleasing. We get an almost physical sensation for the streets and rooms. Here are shots to look for: The first husband walking off cheerfully down the street, swinging an umbrella. Her joy in bathing the baby. A child playing with a ball on a sloping concrete courtyard. Yumiko and her second husband sitting in front of an electric fan in the hot summertime, too exhausted to make love any longer. Yumiko, wearing a deep blue dress, almost lost in shadow at a bus stop. A funeral procession, framed in a long shot between the earth, the sea and the sky. And a reconciliation seen at a great distance.
"Maborosi" is one of those valuable films where you have to actively place yourself in the character\s mind. There are times when we do not know what she is thinking, but we are inspired with an active sympathy. We want to understand. Well, so does she.
"Theres real dramatic suspense in the first scenes after she arrives at the little village. Will she like her new husband? Will their children get along? Can she live in such a backwater? Its lovely how the film reveals the answers to these questions in such small details as a shot where she walks out her back door into the sunshine."
Underneath these immediate questions, of course, lurk the bigger ones. "I just don\t understand!" she says. "It just goes around and around in my head!" Her second husband offers an answer of sorts to her question. It is based on an experience fisherman sometimes have at sea, when they see a light or mirage that tempts them farther from shore. But what is the reason for the light?

Tune In Tomorrow 1990 Cast
Barbara Hershey as Aunt Julia
Keanu Reeves as Martin Loader
Peter Falk as Pedro Carmichael
Bill McCutcheon as Puddler
Patricia Clarkson as Aunt Olga
Richard Portnow as Uncle Luke
Directed by Jon Amiel
Produced by John Fiedler
Mark Tarlov Photographed by
Robert Stevens Edited by
Peter Boyle Music by
Wynton Marsalis Comedy, Drama, Romance
Rated PG-13 108 minutes
"Tune in Tomorrow" is based on "Aunt Julia and the Scriptwriter," a novel by Mario Vargas Llosa, the recent Peruvian presidential candidate, whose original hero was obsessed by resentments against Bolivians. I am not completely sure, but I imagine that outrageous attacks on Bolivians would be funnier in Peru than attacks on Albanians are to American audiences. Maybe "Tune in Tomorrow" should have made them Canadians. We are all familiar, of course, with the unspeakable practices of Canadian milkmaids.
The rest of the novel translates fairly easily from Peru to New Orleans, since it is the sort of comic fantasy that essentially could be set anywhere there is a radio station. The film stars Falk as an itinerant radio writer who invents outrageous plots and then peoples them with the folks he observes around him - stealing not only their personalities but also their dialogue.
In the film,
Keanu Reeves
"is Falks student, a bright and willing young man who wants to learn the radio game, and"
Barbara Hershey
"is Reeves aunt, who has moved to New Orleans to add a new chapter to her unhappy experiences with men. In no time at all, Reeves is in love with Hershey, and their dialogue, which has to be heard to be believed, is soon heard all over town, because Falk eavesdrops and steals their lines word-for-word."
The movie has been directed by
Jon Amiel
who made "
The Singing Detective
" and the wonderful "
Queen of Hearts
," the movie about the Italian family in London. He likes to push the edges of the envelope of plausibility, to fool around with what\s real and what isn\t. In "Queen of Hearts," supernatural events took place side-by-side with natural ones, and in this movie the story cuts back and forth between Falk\s soap opera and the characters who are in it.
That creates a story-within-a-story.
Elizabeth McGovern
plays a robust ingenue whose marriage is the obsessive concern of a large and peculiar family, played by
John Larroquette
,
Buck Henry
,
Peter Gallagher
and others. Falk\s script delights in leading them up to such unspeakable topics as incest and then letting them speak about them, and the film\s method is to cut back and forth between this other story and the equally lurid adventures of the "real" heroes.
The joke is the same as in Woody Allen\s "
Radio Days
," where
Wallace Shawn
of "My Dinner With Andre" played the Masked Avenger, a radio hero who sounded ferocious on the air but looked, in person, exactly like Shawn. Here the actors are workaday radio personalities, shouldering up to the mike with their scripts, but to the radio listeners of New Orleans they are gorgeous, romantic figures.
"Some of the movies best laughs come when the jaws of the listeners drop open with shock and amazement at some of Falks more outrageous fantasies. Nobody seems to know quite how to react to his blatantly unprincipled attacks on the Albanians, however, and indeed the movies uncertain comic tone is a problem all through the story."
Sometimes we laugh easily, sometimes uncertainly, and sometimes we just look at the screen and wonder why anyone thought that was funny. The Albanians are part of the problem, although perhaps not when the film plays in Turkey.

Biggie & Tupac 2003 Directed by
Nick Broomfield Documentary
Rated R For Language
107 minutes And now here is "Biggie & Tupac," which claims to solve the murders of rap artists
Tupac Shakur
"and Christopher Wallace a k a Biggie Smalls, a k a the Notorious B.I.G.. According to Broomfield, both killings were ordered and paid for by recording tycoon Suge Knight, and the hit men were off-duty Los Angeles police officers. He produces an eyewitness who names one of Tupacs killers, and a bag man willing to say, on camera, that he delivered the money for the Notorious B.I.G. hit. And in an astonishing sequence, he marches into a California prison and confronts the surprised Suge Knight on camera."
"Before moving on to Broomfields argument, its worth lingering for a moment or two over that interview with Suge Knight. Knight is the millionaire boss of Death Row Records now called Tha Row Records, has been known to post death threats on his Web site, and is a big, intimidating man--so fearsome that Broomfields photographer, the fellow documentarian"
Joan Churchill
, refused to go into the prison with him, and Broomfield had to hire a free-lancer for the day. A free-lancer so nervous that at one crucial moment the camera was pointed at the clouds overhead.
Broomfield describes all of this in his voiceover track. His movies are, in a sense, about his experiences in making them. Appearing unannounced at the prison, his two-man band is unprepossessing: the sloppy Broomfield with a recorder slung over his shoulder and a boom mike in his hand, and the cameraman trailing nervously behind. A network crew would have required clearances, but maybe Broomfield looks harmless. He says he has an interview scheduled with Suge Knight, and the warden, who takes this at face value, nervously observes that "Mr. Knight" is on the phone.
Broomfield walks fearlessly up to Knight, who carries a mean-looking walking stick and has a couple of apparent bodyguards, and announces he is "here for the interview." What interview? "Your message to the kids," Broomfield brilliantly improvises. Knight, a media creature on autopilot, doesn\t miss a beat in delivering his message "Don\t get in trouble because you can\t afford high-powered lawyers like artists can.". Then Broomfield segues to Tupac and Biggie, predictably without success.
Tupac Shakur was said to be the leading rap artist of his time, and his work in "
"Gridlockd"
" 1997 showed him as a talented actor. He was shot in Las Vegas on Sept. 8, 1996, while his car was in a motorcade following one containing Suge Knight, and died five days later. In March 1997, his rival Biggie Smalls was shot down outside a Los Angeles party.
"Broomfield assembles a case charging that Shakur was ordered killed by Knight because the executive owed the singer unpaid royalties and had heard Shakur planned to jump to another record label. Then he ordered B.I.G.s death in order to make the two murders seem like part of a fictitious East Coast-West Coast rap rivalry. The film observes that Suge Knight had 30 to 40 LAPD officers on his payroll for off-duty bodyguard and other duties. And he produces an LAPD detective whose own investigation into the Shakur murder was stonewalled, leading to his resignation from the force. If nothing else, Broomfield proves that the LAPD bent over backward to avoid questioning the most obvious suspects."
"There is another theory about the two murders, developed in a long Los Angeles Times investigation by Chuck Phillips, published Sept. 6, 2002. His findings in a nutshell: Shakur was killed by the Crips street gang to avenge Shakurs beating of one of their members, and the gun used was supplied by the Notorious B.I.G., who agreed to pay the Crips $1 million. As for B.I.G.s death: It remains unresolved."
Whether either of these theories is correct is not my purpose to decide. What can be said is that "Biggie & Tupac" is compulsively watchable and endlessly inventive as it transforms Broomfield\s limited materials into a compelling argument.
"Broomfield himself is the star of the film, complaining about his gas mileage, forcing himself to listen to one of Tupacs tapes, complaining about his incompetent employees, confessing to fear as he walks into dangerous situations. There is something so disarming about the man as he persuades people to say things on camera that, presumably, could land them in trouble. That no trouble has resulted from those things being said seems to support his argument--that the killings were covered up within the LAPD and there is no interest, these days, in being inconvenienced by any additional facts. It goes without saying that the killings only enhanced the aura around rap music, encouraging other artists to adopt the popular gangsta image."

The Muppets Take Manhattan 1984 Comedy, Family, Music
Rated G 94 minutes
Dear Kermit,
I hope you will take this in the right spirit. I know you\ve been tortured for some years now by an identity crisis, ever since you were discovered sitting on that log down in the swamp, strumming on your ukulele. Stardom happened almost overnight, and here you are in your third starring vehicle, "The Muppets Take Manhattan." Yet you still don\t know who you really are.
You are obviously not a frog. You have none of the attributes of a frog, except for your appearance and your name. In your first film, "
The Muppet Movie
," you were sort of a greenish overgrown pop singer, an amphibian
Frankie Avalon
. In your second movie, "
The Great Muppet Caper
," you were cast adrift in a plot that really belonged to the human guest stars. You basically had a supporting role, making the humans look good. Only in "The Muppets Take Manhattan," your third film, do you really seem to come into your own. You take charge. You are the central figure in the plot, you do not allow yourself to get shouldered aside by
Miss Piggy
, and you seem thoroughly at home with the requirements of genre, stereotype, and cliché. In the 1940s, you would have been under contract to MGM.
The plot of your movie has been seen before. I doubt if that will come as news to you. "The Muppets Take Manhattan" is yet another retread of the reliable old formula in which somebody says "Hey, gang! Our senior class musical show is so good, I\ll bet we could be stars on Broadway!" The fact that this plot is not original does not deter you, Kermit, nor should it. It\s still a good plot.
I liked the scenes in which you persevered. I liked the way you went to New York and challenged the stubborn agents like
Dabney Coleman
, and upstaged
Liza Minnelli
"in Sardis. I especially liked the scenes where you supported yourself by waiting tables in a greasy spoon cafe with rats in the kitchen and a Greek owner who specialized in philosophical statements that didnt make any sense. I even liked Miss Piggys scenes, especially her childhood memories. I gasped at the wedding scene, in which you finally married her. I refrained from speculating about your wedding night -- and speculation is all your G-rated movie left me with."
"In short, I liked just about everything about your movie. But what I liked best was your discovery of self. Kermit, you are no longer a frog with an identity crisis. Youve found the right persona, old boy, and it will see you through a dozen more movies. It was clear to me from the moment you took your curtain call and basked in the spotlight. Kermit, this may come as a shock, but youre"
Mickey Rooney
"in a frog suit. Think about it. Youre short. Youre cute. You never say die. You keep smilin. You have a philosophy for everything. You appear only in wholesome, G-rated movies. And sex bombs like Liza Minnelli only kiss you on the cheek."
"One word of advice. Dump Miss Piggy. Stage a talent search for a Liza Minnelli Muppet. Mickey Rooney made a lot of movies with Lizas mother before you were hatched, Kermit, and now its your turn. Move fast, kid, before you croak."

Knockaround Guys 2002 Cast
Barry Pepper as Matty Demaret
Vin Diesel as Taylor Reese
Seth Green as Johnny Marbles
Andrew Davoli as Chris Scarpa
Dennis Hopper as Benny Chains
John Malkovich as Teddy Deserve
Written and Directed by Brian Koppelman
David Levien Action, Adventure, Comedy, Crime, Thriller
Rated R For Violence, Language and Some Drug Use
93 minutes When Matty Demaret is 12, he fails a test. His uncle gives him a gun and asks him to shoot a squealer. Matty just can\t do it. "That\s all right," his uncle says. "You\re just not cut out for it." Matty grows into a young man determined to make a place for himself in the mob, and hangs around with other young heirs to a shrinking empire. Their fathers sat around counting money, but they\re expected to work the noon and evening shifts at the family restaurant.
Matty 
Barry Pepper
 wants a chance to prove himself. He begs his dad, Benny Chains 
Dennis Hopper
, for a job and finally gets one--picking up some money in Spokane. His friend Johnny Marbles 
Seth Green
 owns a private plane, and Matty asks him to fly the money back east. In the small town of Wibaux, Mont., Johnny Marbles gets rattled by cops in the airport, drops the bag in a luggage zone and loses it. This is not good.
"Knockaround Guys" is inspired by the same impulse as "The Sopranos." It considers gangsters in the modern age, beset by progress, unsure of their roles, undermined by psychobabble. "Used to be there was a way to do things and things got done," Matty\s Uncle Teddy 
John Malkovich
 complains. "Now everybody\s feelings are involved." The heart of the movie takes place in Wibaux, a town ruled by a tall, taciturn, ominous sheriff, played by that unmistakable actor
Tom Noonan
. Matty flies out to Montana with backup: his friends Taylor 
Vin Diesel
 and Scarpa 
Andrew Davoli
. They stick out like sore thumbs in the little town. "Looks like they\re multiplying," the sheriff observes to his deputy. He assumes they\re involved with drugs, doesn\t much care "as long as they move on through," but is very interested in the possibility of money.
The movie crosses two formulas--Fish Out of Water and Coming of Age--fairly effectively. Because it isn\t wall-to-wall action but actually bothers to develop its characters and take an interest in them, it was not at first considered commercial by its distributor, New Line, and languished on the shelf for two years until the growing stardom of Diesel "
XXX
" and Pepper "
We Were Soldiers
" made it marketable. It\s more than that--it\s interesting in the way it shows these guys stuck between generations. And it makes good use of Diesel, who as he develops into an action superstar may not get roles this juicy for a while. He\s a tough guy, yes, a street fighter, but conflicted and with a kind of wise sadness about human nature.
The movie\s basic question, I suppose, is whether the rising generation of mobsters is so self-conscious it will never gain the confidence of its ancestors. If it\s true that the mob in the 1930s learned how to talk by studying Warner Bros. crime pictures, it\s equally true that "The Sopranos" and all the other post-Scorsese "Goodfellas" stories bring in an element of psychological complexity that only confuses an occupation that used to have a brutal simplicity. "Knockaround Guys" opens with Matty being turned down for a job because of his infamous last name. It ends with him not living up to it. "To the regular people, we\re nothing but goombas," Matty complains. "But to our fathers, we\re nothing but hound boys."

Stormy Monday 1988 Cast
Melanie Griffith as Kate
Tommy Lee Jones as Cosmo
Sting as Finney
Sean Bean as Brendan
Produced by Nigel Stafford-Clark
Photographed by Roger Deakins
Edited by David Martin
Action, Drama, Foreign, Romance, Thriller Rated R
93 minutes “Why is it,” someone was asking the other day, “that you movie critics spend all of your time talking about the story and never talk about the visual qualities of a film, which are, after all, what make it a film?” Good question. Maybe it’s because we work in words, and stories are told in words, and it’s harder to use words to paint pictures. But it might be worth a try.
“Stormy Monday” is about the way light falls on wet pavement stones, and about how a neon sign glows in a darkened doorway. It is about the attitudes that men strike when they feel in control of a situation, and the way their shoulders slump when someone else takes power. It is about smoking. It is about cleavage. It is about the look on a man’s face when someone is about to deliberately break his arm, and he knows it. And about the look on a woman’s face when she is waiting for a man she thinks she loves, and he is late, and she fears it is because he is dead.
“Stormy Monday” is also about symbols. It takes place mostly near the seedy waterfront of Newcastle, where a crooked Texas millionaire is trying to run a nightclub owner out of business so he can redevelop the area with laundered money. But now we’re back to the story again. You see how easy it is to slip. The movie uses a lot of symbols of America: the flag, stretched large and bold behind a podium.
Baton twirlers. A curiously frightening old man with a sinister smile, who struts in front of the baton twirlers, his shoulders thrown back, tipping his hat to the crowd. A car - big, fast, and red. Bourbon whiskey. Marlboros and cigars.
It is also about lonely furnished rooms, and rain, and standing in the window at night looking out into the street, and signaling for someone across a crowded nightclub floor, and about saxophones, which are the instrument of the night. It is about the flat, masked expressions on the faces of bodyguards, and about the face of a man who is consumed by anger. And it is about kissing, and about the look in a woman’s eyes when she is about to kiss a man for the first time. And it is about high heels, and cleavage. I believe I already mentioned cleavage. Some images recur more naturally than others.
The movie is not all images. It is also about sounds. About the breathy, rich and yet uncertain tone of
Melanie Griffith
’s voice, which makes her sound as if she’s been around the track too many times and yet is still able to believe in love. And the flat, angry voice of
Tommy Lee Jones
, who never seems to raise his voice, or need to. And about the innocence in the voice of
Sean Bean
, an earnest young man who only wants a job and gets trapped in a bloodbath. And about the voice of Sting, who looks Jones in the eye and talks as flat and angry as he does, until Jones’s shoulders slump. And about saxophones, the sound of the night.
It is also about the sound of a deliberately discordant performance of “The Star-Spangled Banner,” and about explosions and gunfire and squealing tires, and about modern jazz from Kracow. It is about the sound of ice cubes in a glass, and smoke being exhaled, and bones being broken. It is about the sound of a marching band, and about the voice of a disc jockey who wants to sound American and doesn’t know when to stop. And about how a woman tells a man, “I get off work at midnight.” And how she looks when she says that. And how he looks.
So there’s your review.

A Great Wall 1986 Cast
Peter Wang as Leo Fang
Sharon Iwai as Grace Fang
Kelvin Han as Paul Fang
Chao Li Qinqin as Yee Lili
Hy Xiaoguang as Mr. Chao
Shen Guanglan as Mrs. Chao
Directed by Peter Wang
Produced by Shirley Sun
From Their Screenplay Photographed by
Peter Stein Robert Primes
Edited by Grahame Weinbren
Music by David Liang
Ge Ganru Rated PG
100 minutes "A Great Wall" is a human comedy about a Chinese-American family that goes to visit relatives in Peking, and within that simple premise are so many inspirations that the movie is interesting even when it\s just looking at things.
Although the father of the American family, Leo Fang, was born in China, he left when he was 10. As the movie begins, he is a thoroughly middle-class American, a computer expert in the Silicon Valley. His wife is Chinese, born in America, and their son is a tall, stocky jock type who likes to wear his Stanford sweatshirt. We get the impression they know as much about daily life in the Peoples Republic as we do - which is, as this movie demonstrates, almost nothing.
"The film opens by cutting between vignettes of the daily lives of the Fangs in California and the Chaos in Peking. Mrs. Chao is Leo Fangs sister, and theyve been corresponding for 30 years. We see Fang engaged in a showdown with his boss at work, and then we see Chao in his tiny garden, performing his morning tai chi ritual, which climaxes in a highly satisfactory burst of flatulence."
Once they\re in China, the Fangs decide to live with the Chaos instead of in one of the big tourist hotels. Life is crowded but low-key, and Paul Fang, their son, is astonished by the lives of his teenage cousins. In particular, he can\t believe that the Chaos open all of their children\s mail before handing it to them. "Haven\t you ever heard of privacy here?" he asks, but apparently they have not.
The movie unfolds almost slyly, setting up situations in which the Americans and the Chinese discover things about each other. There is no attempt to turn the film into a travelogue, with montages of scenic China, but of course we do get a glimpse of the Great Wall and another glimpse, which for me was more startling, of expressway traffic speeding past the high-rises of downtown Peking. I suppose I knew intellectually that the capital of the largest nation on Earth would have high-rises, but somehow my mental picture of Peking had lots of pagodas and rickshas in it.
"A Great Wall" is billed as the first American movie made in China, and it was directed by
Peter Wang
who also plays the lead and produced by
Shirley Sun
, a San Francisco documentary filmmaker.
Although they were allowed the freedom to shoot on location, their film has not yet been shown widely in China, apparently because it shows the visiting Fangs violating some official guidelines. For example, I learn from the press notes, no foreign family - even a Chinese family from overseas - would be allowed to live with a local family. They would be carefully kept within official tourist channels. This policy of separation is implied in one scene where the Fangs and the Chaos go to a public cafe together and draw disapproving stares from two official-looking men.
The chief pleasure of "A Great Wall" is its observation of the different attitudes toward the daily process of living in China and the United States. The Fangs are upward-bound yuppies. Things move more slowly in the Chao household. Peter Fang is a college student. The Chaos\ daughter is impatiently awaiting the results of her examinations, which will determine if she is one of a lucky handful who will go on to higher education.
Fang, who is at the cutting edge in the Silicon Valley, has trouble concealing his reaction when he is proudly shown a Chinese computer "laboratory" that seems to consist of one ordinary personal computer. But he looks even more amazed when he observes his brother-in-law in the garden, preparing for the day\s pressures with meditation and tai chi.
At the end of the film, there have been no great revelations, no great conflicts, no great surprises. Just the experience of an American family living for a month among their roots, as the father observes the life he would no doubt be leading if he had stayed in China instead of being taken to the United States.
"A Great Wall" is about the sort of visit I imagine most of us would like to make, back to the people and the ways of life where we, or our ancestors, came from. We would likely discover what the Fangs discover, that you can\t go home again. The original title of this movie said it more plainly. It was "The Great Wall Is a Great Wall."

Bagdad Cafe 1988 Cast
Marianne Sagebrecht as Jasmin
CCH Pounder as Brenda
Jack Palance as Rudi Cox
Christine Kaufmann as Debby
Monica Calhoun as Phyllis
Darron Flagg as Sal Jr.
George Aquilar as Cahuenga
G. Smokey Campbell as Sal
Hans Stadlbauer as Muenchstettner
Alan S. Craig as Eric
Directed by Percy Adlon
Written and Produced by Percy
Eleonore Adlon Edited by
Norbert Herzner Photographed by
Bernd Heinl Music by
Bob Telson Comedy, Drama, Indie
Rated PG 91 minutes
The heavyset German lady, her body and soul tightly corseted, her hair sprayed into rocklike permanence, is having a fight with her husband, right there in the Mojave Desert. They are in the middle of some kind of miserable vacation, touring America as a version of hell.
She can take no more. She grabs her suitcase and stalks away from their Mercedes, he drives away into the red, dusty sky, and she walks to a miserable truck stop and asks for a room.
An opening like that makes you stop and think, doesn\t it, about how cut-and-dried most Hollywood movies are. There would seem to be no place in today\s entertainment industry for movies about fat German ladies and homesick truck stops, and yet "Bagdad Cafe" sets us free from the production line of Hollywood\s brain-damaged "high concepts" and walks its own strange and lovely path. There is poetic justice in the fact that this movie, shot in English in America by a German, is one of the biggest box office successes in recent European history.
The German woman is named Jasmin 
Marianne Sagebrecht
, and she is appalled by the conditions she finds at the Bagdad Cafe. It is simply not being run along clean and efficient German lines.
The proprietor is a free-thinking black woman named Brenda 
CCH Pounder
- yes, CCH Pounder, who shares the premises with her teenage children, a baby, a bewildered Italian cook, a tattoo artist and a shipwrecked former Hollywood set painter who is played by
Jack Palance
as if he had definitely painted his last set.
Jasmin sets to work. She gets a mop and a pail and begins to clean her room, while the motel regulars look on in amazement. Back and forth she goes, like some kind of natural force that has been set into implacable motion against dirt. Gradually her sphere extends to other rooms in the motel, and to the public areas, and she gives Brenda little lectures about cleanliness and the importance of maintaining high standards for the public.
Day by day, little by little, however, Jasmin herself is changed by this laid-back desert environment. Her too-tight hausfrau dresses give way to a blouse that billows outside her slacks. A stray wisp of hair escapes from the glistening spray, and then finally her hair comes tumbling down in windswept freedom. And she reveals that she can do magic tricks.
"Yes, magic tricks. After she whips the cook into shape and the truck stops restaurant begins to do some business, she starts entertaining some of the customers with closeup illusions, which eventually grow in scale until the Bagdad Cafe is presenting its own cabaret night after night, with all the regulars pressed into the act."
All of this sounds rather too nice, I suppose, and so I should add that
Percy Adlon
, the director, maintains a certain bleak undercurrent of despair, of crying babies and unpaid bills and young people who have come to the ends of their ropes.
He is saying something in this movie about Europe and America, about the old and the new, about the edge of the desert as the edge of the American Dream. I am not sure exactly what it is, but that is comforting; if a director could assemble these strange characters and then know for sure what they were doing in the same movie together, he would be too confident to find the humor in their situation. The charm of "Bagdad Cafe" is that every character and every moment is unanticipated, obscurely motivated, of uncertain meaning and vibrating with life.

Motherhood 2009 Cast
Uma Thurman as Eliza
Anthony Edwards as Avery McKendrik
Minnie Driver as Sheila
Daisy Tahan as Clara
Herself as Jodie Foster
Written and directed by Katherine Dieckmann
Comedy, Drama Rated PG-13
for language, sexual references and a brief drug-related comment 89 minutes
"Motherhood" is about a conventional family living a conventional life in a conventional way. This life isn\t perfect, but whose life is? The father is absentminded but means well, the kids are normal, the mother is trying to juggle parental duties and her plans for a career. This could be countless families. Why do we require a movie about this particular one?
The film stars
Uma Thurman
", doing her best with a role that may offer her less than any other in her career, even though shes constantly onscreen. Shes Eliza, who takes her laptop along to the playground to work on her blog, which is just a blog. Shes not cooking her way through Julia Child or anything. Her husband is played by"
Anthony Edwards
". I didnt remember the characters name after seeing the movie, so I checked with IMDb, and he doesnt seem to have one. That tells you something."
The kids are 6-year-old Clara 
Daisy Tahan
 and 2-year-old Lucas twins David and Matthew Shallipp. The tooth-challenged Daisy is pitch-perfect at that demanding age when kids become fixated on their convictions. Watching the movie, it occurred to me that child actors are invariably terrific. Maybe we are all born as great actors, but after a certain age, most of us morph into bad ones.
Some effort is made to introduce interest to the cast.
Minnie Driver
"plays a best friend who has an unsatisfactory personal life; the two women go to a sale of womens clothing during which they have tugs of war with other women who want the same frocks. Did I mention the movie takes place in Manhattan? That would also explain the crotchety neighbor "
Alice Drummond
, who is annoyed that a movie crew is using their street as a location. It would also explain
Jodie Foster
"s cameo as a mom being followed by paparazzi. Dont you sort of imagine that if you lived in Greenwich Village you"
would
sometimes have a Jodie Foster sighting?
The movie suggests two directions that might fruitfully have employed by
Katherine Dieckmann
, the writer and director. One is in the person of an East Indian delivery man Arjun Gupta who begins an intriguing conversation with Eliza. Indian Americans are appearing in movies much more frequently -- for one reason, I suspect, because we like their accents. An Indian friend told me, "We have been speaking English longer than you have." Could this meeting have been developed into a subplot?
The other direction might have been fundamental. Instead of jumping through hoops to make Eliza somehow seem unique, special and besieged by her utterly commonplace problems, how about making her desperate with boredom and the desire to break out into the extraordinary? Maybe her blog dives off the high board and she becomes a media creature? I dunno.
The movie is billed as a comedy, but at no point will you require oxygen. There are some smiles and chuckles and a couple of actual laughs, but the overall effect is underwhelming. Meh.

Bean 1997 Cast
Rowan Atkinson as Mr. Bean
John Mills as Chairman
Peter Capaldi as Gareth
June Brown as Delilah
Peter Egan as Lord Walton
Directed by Mel Smith
Written by Richard Curtis
Robin Driscoll Comedy
Rated PG-13 For Moments Of Risque Humor
87 minutes Bean is like a malevolent Ace Ventura in slow motion. Remember the cartoon character who went everywhere with the dark rain cloud hovering over his head? For everyone he meets, Bean is that cloud. Since so many slapstick heroes are relentlessly cheerful or harmless, his troublesome streak is sort of welcome.
Bean, played by
Rowan Atkinson
, first came to life as the star of a British sitcom that quickly became the most popular comedy show in English-speaking markets all over the world. In America, where Bean hides out on PBS, he is not as well-known. Now comes “Bean” the movie, which arrives in the United States having already grossed more than $100 million in the U.K., Australia, Canada, etc.
Although America is the last market to play “Bean,” the film seems to have been tailored with an eye to Yank viewers; most of the action takes place in Los Angeles. The set-up is in London, where Bean is employed as a guard at an art gallery and is “easily our worst employee,” as the curator says at a board meeting where the first order of business is to fire him. When the ancient chairman 
John Mills
" vetoes that idea, the board gleefully ships Bean off to America as its representative at the unveiling of “Whistlers Mother.” The famous painting has been purchased from a French museum by a rich retired general "
Burt Reynolds
", who is no art lover but hates the idea that the “Frenchies” own Americas most famous painting. Beans task will be to oversee the installation of the painting in L.A., and speak at the unveiling--tasks for which he is spectacularly unequipped."
"The Bean character has his roots in the clowns of silent comedy, although few were this nasty. On TV, he scarcely speaks at all, preferring wordlike sounds and swallowed consonants, but here he blurts out the odd expression, and in one of the funniest scenes, gives a speech before assembled art experts. His adventures are a mixture of deliberate malice and accidental malice. For example, when he inflates the barf bag on an airplane and pops it above the head of a sleeping passenger, thats malice. But the fact that it was filled with vomit--that was an accident. Beans host in the United States is a young curator "
Peter MacNicol
, whose wife 
Pamela Reed
 and children move out of the house after about 20 minutes of Bean. MacNicol hangs in there, as he must: His boss 
Harris Yulin
" has warned him his job depends on it. Bean goes on a tour of L.A., succeeding in speeding up a virtual reality ride so that it hurls patrons at the screen, and thats benign compared to what he eventually does to “Whistlers Mother.” The movie gets in some sly digs as the California museum prepares to market the painting with tie-in products such as T-shirts, beach towels and beer mugs. But most of the film consists of Bean wandering about, wrinkling his brow, screwing up his face, making sublingual guttural sounds and wreaking havoc."
"Who is Bean, anyway? Like the Little Tramp, he exists in a world of his own, perhaps as a species of his own. He combines guile and cluelessness he knows enough to use an electric razor on his face, but not enough to refrain from also shaving his tongue. He knows how to perform tasks, but not when to stop can stuff a turkey, but gets it stuck on his head. And he is not, in any sense, lovable the movie gets a smile with MacNicols attempt to tack on one of those smarmy moments where its observed that Bean means well; he doesnt mean well."
There are many moments here that are very funny, but the film as a whole is a bit too long. Perhaps the half-hour TV form is the perfect length for Bean. When the art gallery episode has closed and the action shifts to a hospital operating room, I had the distinct feeling that director
Mel Smith
"was padding. Maybe theres a rule that all feature films must be at least 90 minutes long. At an hour, “Bean” would have been nonstop laughs. Then they added 30 minutes of stops."

A Life Less Ordinary 1997 Cast
Ewan McGregor as Robert
Cameron Diaz as Celine
Ian Holm as Naville
Delroy Lindo as Jackson
Holly Hunter "as OReilly"
Dan Hedaya as Chief Gabriel
Directed by Danny Boyle
Written by John Hodge
Comedy, Drama, Fantasy, Foreign, Romance, Science Fiction, Thriller Rated R
For Violence and Language 90 minutes
“Life Less Ordinary” is from the team that gave us “
Shallow Grave
” and “
Trainspotting
”, so maybe it’s a penance that their characters this time are angels and lovers, rather than body snatchers and druggies. See, ma? We’re good lads at heart.
The film expends enormous energy to tell a story that is tedious and contrived. It begins in heaven’s police station, where Chief Gabriel acting on orders from the top dispatches two angels to earth to engineer a romance. It appears that God is displeased by the divorce rate.
We meet the two lovers that heaven plans to unite. Robert 
Ewan McGregor
 is a janitor. Celine 
Cameron Diaz
 is a millionaire’s daughter who amuses herself by using a handgun to shoot apples off the head of her fiance 
Stanley Tucci
. She misses, and a friend observes, “He’ll live, but he’ll never practice orthodontics again.” Robert works for her father’s company, and when he’s replaced by robots, he seizes one of the squat little machines and tries to smash it against the wall of the chairman’s office. The millionaire 
Ian Holm
 calls security, Robert grabs a gun from a guard, and at a crucial point Celine kicks the gun back into Robert’s grasp--maybe because she hopes he will kidnap her, which he does.
The film then settles into a formula familiar from two other recent films, “
Excess Baggage
” and “
Nothing to Lose
.” The kidnapper and his victim grow friendly and eventually become conspirators. Robert turns out to be inept at making threatening phone calls, and Celine starts with helpful hints and ends up stage-managing the kidnapping herself. “That’s all I am to you,” he complains bitterly. “Your latest kidnapper--a fashion accessory!” All of this is being manipulated, in a sense, by two angels, Jackson 
Delroy Lindo
 and O’Reilly 
Holly Hunter
. For reasons unclear to me, they are hired by the millionaire to track down his daughter and the kidnapper, and the movie develops into a long, unhinged chase sequence in which the angels act more like cops than matchmakers. By this point I was well past caring.
After the anarchic glee of “Trainspotting,” this film is a move toward the mainstream by the team of director
Danny Boyle
, producer Andrew Macdonald and writer
John Hodge
. It’s a conventional movie that never convinces us that it needed to be made. Most films with angels depend more on supernatural intervention than character development, but in this case the film seems completely confused about the nature the intervention should take, and so are we. The plot’s a mess, the characters flail about in scenes without points, and the more we see of Cameron Diaz and Ewan McGregor, the more we yearn for a nice, simple little love story--say, about the rich girl who falls in love with the Scots janitor and gets along just fine without any angels.

Crocodile Dundee In Los Angeles 2001 Cast
Paul Hogan as Mick Dundee
Linda Kozlowski as Sue Charlton
Jere Burns as Arnan Rothman
Jonathan Banks as Milos Drubnik
Serge Cockburn as Mikey Dundee
Directed by Simon Wincer
Written by Matthew Berry
Eric Abrams Action, Adventure, Comedy
Rated PG For Language and Brief Violence
95 minutes "I dont want to see a movie about Crocodile Dundee, I just want to hang out with him. Anyone who can rassle crocodiles and be that nice must know the secret of life. If he knew the secret of making movies, thered be no stopping the bloke."
"Crocodile Dundee in Los Angeles" is a movie about a genial man and his sweet wife and nice son, and how they leave the Australian Outback and fly to L.A. and foil an international smuggling ring. I\ve seen audits that were more thrilling.
The movie recycles the formula of the original "
Crocodile Dundee
" movie from 1986 and the 1988 sequel. Together those two titles rang up a worldwide gross in the neighborhood of $610 million for
Paul Hogan
. Good on ya, mate! The only mystery about the third movie, more intriguing than anything in its plot, is why there was a 13-year delay before the next title in such a lucrative series.
Paul Hogan is just plain a nice guy. He\s low-key and folksy, and hardly ever gets mad, and has such a studied naivete regarding life in the big city that he not only comes from the Outback but must live in a soundproof hole out there. Like the hero of "
Memento
," he seems to suffer from short-term memory loss, which is why in movie after movie he can expose himself to would-be muggers, or walk into gay bars without realizing it.
In "Crocodile Dundee in Los Angeles," he lives in a town with a population of 20 with his partner Sue 
Linda Kozlowski
, who met him in the first movie when she was a New York newspaper reporter. He runs Outback safaris, traps crocodiles and picks up his son Mikey after school. Sue, whose father is an international press baron, is happy to live so far from town, as indeed she might be, considering that Croc does the dishes and only occasionally puts an animal trap in to soak with the china. Now her father asks her to fill in for a deceased reporter in his Los Angeles bureau, and that leads Sue and Croc to stumble over a scheme in which money-losing movies are made in order to cover up a scam.
The movie is pokey and the jokes amble onscreen, squat down on their haunches and draw diagrams of themselves in the dust. But enough Croc-bashing. Truth in journalism compels me to report that "Crocodile Dundee" is at least genial family entertainment, quite possibly of interest to younger audiences and entirely lacking in the vomitous content of such other current films as "
See Spot Run
," "
Joe Dirt
" and "
Freddy Got Fingered
." Since the studios are advertising those excremental exercises in places where kids develop a desire to see them, it is good, after they see "
Spy Kids
," to have an innocent and harmless entertainment like "Crocodile Dundee in Los Angeles" as another choice. It may not be brilliant, but who would you rather your kids took as a role model: Crocodile Dundee,
David Spade
or
Tom Green
? It is a melancholy milestone in our society when parents pray, "Please, God, let my child grow up to admire a crocodile rassler," but there you have it.

Moonlight Mile 2002 Cast
Jake Gyllenhaal as Joe Nast
Dustin Hoffman as Ben Floss
Susan Sarandon as Jojo Floss
Holly Hunter as Mona Camp
Ellen Pompeo as Bertie Knox
Dabney Coleman as Mike Mulcahey
Allan Corduner as Stan Michaels
Richard T. Jones as Ty
Written and Directed by Brad Silberling
Drama, Romance Rated PG-13
For Some Sensuality and Brief Strong Language 112 minutes
After the funeral is over and the mourners have come back to the house for coffee and cake and have all gone home, the parents and the boyfriend of Diana, the dead girl, sit by themselves. Her mother criticizes how one friend expressed her sympathy. And the father asks, what could she say? "Put yourself in their shoes." That little scene provides a key to Brad Silberling\s "Moonlight Mile." What do you say when someone dies--someone you cared for? What are the right words? And what\s the right thing to do? Death is the ultimate rebuke to good manners. The movie, which makes an unusually intense effort to deal with the process of grief and renewal, is inspired by a loss in Silberling\s own life. The TV actress
Rebecca Schaeffer
, his girlfriend at the time, was killed in 1989 by a fan. Silberling has grown very close to her parents in the years since then, he told me, and more than a decade later he has tried to use the experience as the starting point for a film.
"Moonlight Mile," which takes place in 1973, opens in an elliptical way. At first only quiet clues in the dialogue allow us to understand that someone has died. We meet Joe Nast 
Jake Gyllenhaal
, the fiance of the dead girl, and her parents Ben and JoJo Floss 
Dustin Hoffman
and
Susan Sarandon
. They talk not in a sentimental way, but in that strange, detached tone we use when grief is too painful to express and yet something must be said.
After the funeral and the home visitation, the film follows what in a lesser film would be called the "healing process." "Moonlight Mile" is too quirky and observant to be described in psychobabble. Joe stays stuck in the Floss house, living in an upstairs bedroom, his plans on hold. Ben, who has lost a daughter, now in a confused way hopes to gain a son, and encourages Joe to join him in his business as a real estate developer. JoJo, protected by intelligence and wit, looks closely and suspects a secret Joe is keeping, which leaves him stranded between the past and future.
Gyllenhaal, who in person is a jokester, in the movies almost always plays characters who are withdrawn and morose. Remember him in "
Donnie Darko
," "
The Good Girl
" and "Lovely & Amazing." Here, too, he is a young man with troubled thoughts. At the post office, and again at a bar where she has a night job, he meets Bertie Knox 
Ellen Pompeo
", who sees inside when others only look at the surface. They begin to talk. She has a loss, too: Her boyfriend has been missing in action in Vietnam for three years. While it is possible that they will mend each others hearts by falling in love, the movie doesnt simple-mindedly pursue that plot path, but meanders among the thoughts of the living."
"Silberlings screenplay pays full attention to all of the characters. Ben and JoJo are not simply a backdrop to a romance involving Joe and Bertie. The movie provides key scenes for all of the characters, in conversation and in monologue, so that it is not only about Joes grieving process but about all four, who have lost different things in different ways."
Anyone regarding the Hoffman character will note that his name is Benjamin and remember Hoffman\s most famous character, in "
The Graduate
." But Joe is the Benjamin of this film, and Hoffman\s older man has more in common with another of his famous roles: Willy Loman, the hero of "Death of a Salesman." Ben occupies a low-rent storefront office on Main Street in Cape Anne, Mass., but dreams of putting together a group of properties and bringing in a superstore like Kmart. This will be his big killing, the deal that caps his career, even though we can see in the eyes of the local rich man 
Dabney Coleman
" that Ben is too small to land this fish. Bens desire to share his dream with his surrogate son, Joe, also has echoes from the"
Arthur Miller
tragedy.
Sarandon\s JoJo is tart, with a verbal wit to protect her and a jaundiced view of her husband\s prospects. The deepest conversation JoJo has with Joe "Isn\t it funny, that we have the same name?" is about as well done as such a scene can be. She intuits that Joe is dealing not only with the loss of Diana\s life but with the loss of something else.
"Pompeo, a newcomer, plays Bertie with a kind of scary charisma that cannot be written, only felt. She knows she is attractive to Joe. She knows she likes him. She knows she is faithful to her old boyfriend. She is frightened by her own power to attract, especially since she wants to attract even while she tells herself she doesnt. She is so vulnerable in this movie, so sweet as she senses Joes pain and wants to help him."
Holly Hunter
"is the fifth major player, as the lawyer who is handling the case against Dianas killer. She embodies the wisdom of the law, which knows, as laymen do not, that it moves with its own logic regardless of the feelings of those in the courtroom. She offers practical advice, and then you can see in her eyes that she wishes she could offer emotional advice instead."
"Moonlight Mile" gives itself the freedom to feel contradictory things. It is sentimental but feels free to offend, is analytical and then surrenders to the illogic of its characters, is about grief and yet permits laughter. Everyone who has grieved for a loved one will recognize the moment, some days after the death, when an irreverent remark will release the surprise of laughter. Sometimes we laugh, that we may not cry. Not many movies know that truth. "Moonlight Mile" is based on it.

"Squanto: A Warriors Tale 1994" Cast
Adam Beach as Squanto
Sheldon Peters as Mooshawset
Irene Bedard as Wolfchild Nakooma
Directed by Xavier Koller
Drama, Family Rated PG
102 minutes "Squanto" is a highly imaginary version of the first contacts between Native Americans and early settlers from England. Set just before and after the founding of the Plymouth Colony in 1620, it runs everything through the mill of Political Correctness, so that we get a character who says, "If we want to understand them, then we should learn all we can about their culture." My own reading about the Puritans indicates they were interested mostly in establishing their own culture, were intolerant of disagreement, and did not think the Indians had a culture. But this is one of those historical movies in which everything is seen in hindsight - even the introduction of popcorn to Europeans, which the hero accomplishes along with many other feats.
His name is Squanto 
Adam Beach
, and as the movie opens he has just been married to the fragrant Nakooma 
Irene Bedard
. Then sailing ships are sighted off the coast, and soon the Indians are trading furs for baubles. Squanto foolishly trusts the English explorers and, along with his friend Epenow 
Eric Schweig
" accepts an invitation to help load the furs onboard the ship; theyre kidnapped, and returned to England as curiosities, for public exhibition."
Squanto, who must have been the Houdini of his time, is not easy to keep captive, and soon he has taken refuge in a monastery, where the friendly monks protect him. Brother Daniel 
Mandy Patinkin
 gives him a tour of the library and offers to teach him English, which Squanto learns with such alacrity that soon he speaks it better than Henry Kissinger, and with less of an accent.
Meanwhile, a manhunt occupies all England; the vile Sir George 
Michael Gambon
, whose ships brought Squanto back from the new land, considers the Indian his property, and wants him returned.
Through complications too unlikely to explain, Squanto learns of a shipload of Puritans who just happened to be setting off for North America, and jumps onboard, on horseback, knocking Sir George into the drink.
By a wonderful coincidence, the ship lands at the very shore where Squanto\s tribe awaits, and then the Puritans, after some initial suspicion and hostility, celebrate the first Thanksgiving in a scene that could double as an ad for the Turkey Council. Somehow I doubt the dialogue of their reconciliation, including "Enough! Too much blood!" Still, all is then peaceful for two generations, the end titles inform us - until, of course, the Europeans begin 300 years of broken treaties and genocide, but that\s another movie.
"Squanto" is the kind of superficial, tidied-up, idealized history that might appeal to younger viewers. No thoughtful person will be able to take it seriously. For an incomparably more accurate and evocative portrayal of the earliest contacts between Native Americans and Europeans, see Bruce Beresford\s "
Black Robe
" 1991, which is to "Squanto" as Geronimo is to Tonto.

Assault on Precinct 13 2005 Cast
Ethan Hawke as Jake Roenick
Laurence Fishburne as Marion Bishop
John Leguizamo as Beck
Maria Bello as Alex Sabian
Drea de Matteo as Iris Ferry
Matt Craven as Capra
Brian Dennehy "as Jasper OShea"
Gabriel Byrne as Marcus Duvall
Aisha Hinds as Anna
Ja Rule as Smiley
Directed by Jean-Francois Richet
Screenplay by James Demonaco
Written by John Carpenter
Action, Crime, Thriller Rated R
for violence 91 minutes
\Assault on Precinct 13" is not so much a remake as a riff on an old familiar plot: The fort is surrounded, and the defenders have to fight off the attackers and deal with possible traitors in their midst.
Howard Hawks
did versions of this so often that after
John Wayne
starred for him in "
Rio Bravo
" 1959 and "
El Dorado
" 1966, he told Wayne he was sending over a script for "
Rio Lobo
," and Wayne told him, "I\ll make it, but I don\t need to read it. We\ve already made it twice."
John Carpenter\s 1976 film, made just before his famous "
Halloween
," added some touches from George Romeo\s "
Night of the Living Dead
" and moved the action from a threatened sheriff\s office in the Old West to a threatened police station in the inner city. Now French director
Jean-Francois Richet
takes essentially the same material and makes it work with strong performances and a couple of new twists.
Precinct 13, in this version, is scheduled to close forever at midnight. Burnt-out desk sergeant Jake Fornick 
Ethan Hawke
", still traumatized by the death of two partners, is on the graveyard shift with old-timer Jasper OShea "
Brian Dennehy
, who in a revelation fraught with omens, announces he will soon retire. Also in the station is the buxom secretary Iris 
Drea de Matteo
.
"Theres basically nothing for them to do except for Jake to pop some more pain-killers and chase them with booze from the office bottle."
Then everything changes. An ubercriminal named Bishop 
Laurence Fishburne
 has been arrested and is being transported by police bus with some other detainees, including the motormouth Beck 
John Leguizamo
, a crew-cut girl crook 
Aisha Hinds
 and a counterfeiter named Smiley Jeffrey Atkins, a k a
Ja Rule
". Its New Years Eve, a Dark and Stormy Night, the highway is blocked by an accident, the officers on the bus decide to dump the prisoners at Precinct 13, and then things get dicey when it appears that Bishops men are determined to break him free."
"Its up to Jake to pull himself together and command the defense of the surrounded station; he cant call for help because the phones, cell phones and radios are all conveniently inoperable -- all because of the Dark and Stormy, etc., I think."
Turns out the forces surrounding the station are not quite who they seem, ratcheting up the level of interest and danger, and providing
Gabriel Byrne
"with one of his thankless roles in which he is hard, taciturn, and one-dimensional enough to qualify for Flatland. Never mind; an interesting dynamic develops inside the station, especially after Jakes psychiatrist Alex Sabian "
Maria Bello
 comes to visit, leaves for home, has to return to the station because of the Dark, etc., and ends up as part of the defense team. Also recruited are the prisoners, who must fight for their own lives alongside the cops who have imprisoned them.
"All classic and airtight, and handled by Richet with economy and a sturdy clarity of action; he doesnt go overboard with manic action scenes. There are, however, a few plot points that confused me. One is the way a forest seems to materialize near the station, which seemed in an overhead shot to be in an urban wasteland. My other problem is with a character who, in order to be who he is and what he is, would have to have known that Bishop would end up at Precinct 13, even though Bishop clearly ends up there by accident. Oh, and a tunnel turns up at a convenient moment, as tunnels so often do."
"Problems like these amuse me with the nerve that is shown in trying to ignore them. Everybody is in a forest in the middle of downtown Detroit? OK, then everybody can hide behind trees. Theyre running down a long-forgotten sewage tunnel? OK, but not so forgotten that it doesnt have electric lights."
"Theres no way for that particular character to have prior knowledge of where Bishop would be, and no way for him to communicate plans that are essential to the outcome?"
OK, then just ignore those technicalities, and concentrate on such delightful synchronicities as that John Wayne played characters named both Ethan and Hawk.

Brainstorm 1983 Cast
Christopher Walken as Michael Brace
Natalie Wood as Karen Brace
Louise Fletcher as Lillian Reynolds
Cliff Robertson as Alex Terson
Produced and directed by Douglas Trumbull
From a screenplay by Robert Stitzel
Screenplay by Philip Frank Messina
Photographed by Richard Yuricich
Science Fiction, Thriller Rated PG
106 minutes "One of the most sensible suggestions Ive heard about telepathy is that the human race probably evolved out of it. It was necessary for us to lose the power of telepathy in order to become individuals. If we could tap into the Racial Mind all the time, think of the trouble if the guy next door had a headache."
"Brainstorm" considers problems like that. It begins with the invention of an amazing machine that gives you the impression you are actually having somebody else\s experience. Plug into it, and you hear, see, feel, touch and smell whatever\s been programmed. What\s more, it\s telepathic; it can take those sensations out of one mind and channel them into another.
"The applications are endless. In one demonstration, the wearer believes he is being chased down a mountain road by a runaway truck, and then his car misses a curve and goes sailing through the air. There also are the usual stunts like putting you in the front seat of a roller coaster. But then theres a complication. One of the scientists who developed the gadget inadvertently records her own death. And when her colleagues play back her recording, they have the death experience, too."
This is a good idea for a movie. Unfortunately, in "Brainstorm" it remains basically an idea. The characters take such a secondary importance to the gadget that we never feel much for them. Ironic, that the movie doesn\t give us their sights, smells, tastes, etc. The cast is populated with actors whose full abilities aren\t used. We particularly notice that in the case of
Natalie Wood
", who died while making this movie, and who is good to see once again, but who isnt given even one big, challenging, deep scene; shes just part of the plot machinery."
Louise Fletcher
is also misused. She plays a chain-smoking scientist. Period. She smokes all of the time. She lights a cigarette every time the camera looks at her. Half of this mannerism would have been sufficient; it becomes a joke instead of a trait.
Cliff Robertson
and
Christopher Walken
, as the head of the computer company and his brilliant scientist, also are trapped in roles rather than characters.
But the technical effects are intriguing.
Douglas Trumbull
, the director, is Hollywood\s legendary special effects ace "
2001: A Space Odyssey
," "
Silent Running
," "
Close Encounters of the Third Kind
", and he does a wonderful job of making the telepathic experiences visually exciting. He cuts back and forth between wide screen and regular format, between ordinary sound and stereo, between standard lenses and astonishing visual effects. Great, except the people get overlooked.

The Fire Within 1964 Cast
Maurice Ronet as Alain Leroy
Lena Skerla as Lydia
Yvonne Clech as Mme. Farnoux
Jeanne Moreau as Jeanne
Written and directed by Louis Malle
Photographed by Ghislain Cloquet
Drama, Foreign, Indie 108 minutes
Seems to me it was
John Huston
who observed that a movie shouldn\t be "based" on a book but inspired by it. Movies that are faithful to the book are usually dull and plodding affairs, because the things that make a book good are far removed from what makes a movie work. So the director should distill the essence of the book, Huston decided.
Louis Malle
has done that brilliantly in "The Fire Within," which isn\t exactly based on Scott Fitzgerald\s "Babylon Revisited" but is certainly inspired by it. Indeed, Malle\s hero reads the Fitzgerald story in the days before his suicide, finishing the last page just before he pulls the trigger. So that the two men -- Fitzgerald\s and Malle\s -- live parallel lives.
Malle is one of the less-known French New Wave directors although his "Zazie" is a film society favorite, and this film never received a U.S. commercial release after its triumph at the 1964 New York Film Festival. So it comes to us now as a rediscovered treasure, a film that would have been influential for the past five years -- if only it had been shown.
"Malles character seems superficially similar to Fitzgerald himself. He is a writer, living in Paris, who lived in New York for a while but is now divorced from his wife there. And he is an alcoholic, whose addiction had undermined his confidence in his art and his manhood. We find him living in a rest home, where he voluntarily took the cure and then decided to stay."
He lives in a bemused and private world. He speaks softly to himself, he hums, he moves silently about his room, he toys with esoteric bric-a-brac, he is preoccupied with the enormous thought of his own death. Urged by the doctor to leave because he is "cured," the writer goes to Paris one day and systematically revisits several of his friends. He drinks too much and makes a fool of himself at a party; he questions the fundamental worth of his friends\ bourgeois existence; finally he comes back to the home and, hardly seeming moved even now, kills himself.
"The film is a triumph of style. It is quiet and indicative. It doesnt explain a lot, but we understand a lot about it all the same. And in the concerned, indifferent, kind, cruel behavior of his friends, we see ourselves acting toward people like him, or acted toward by people like them. Rarely does a film so carefully portray this complexity of personal relationships."

Benny and Joon 1993 Cast
Johnny Depp as Sam
Mary Stuart Masterson as Joon
Aidan Quinn as Benny
Directed by Jeremiah Chechik
Action, Comedy, Drama, Romance Rated PG
100 minutes "Benny and Joon" is a film that approaches its subjects so gingerly it almost seems afraid to touch them. The story wants to be about love, but is also about madness, and somehow it weaves the two together with a charm that would probably not be quite so easy in real life.
The title characters are two young adults, Benny 
Aidan Quinn
 and his kid sister, known as Joon 
Mary Stuart Masterson
". He works to support them. She stays at home and paints, during her good periods, and rages at him, during her bad times. She is schizophrenic, although the screenplay doesnt ever say the word out loud. When she takes her medication and stays calm and things go smoothly, their lives are blessedly uneventful."
"One of Bennys few pleasures is a monumental, long-running poker game, at which the stakes are all sorts of things other than money."
One night Joon loses a big bet, and is forced to provide temporary room and board for a strange, goofy relative of one of the other players. This is Sam 
Johnny Depp
, who is sane but lives in a strange blissful moonscape all his own.
"The first time we see Sam, riding on the bus, hes reading a book about the silent clown"
Buster Keaton
. This is not idle curiosity. Sam has somehow determined to internalize the genius of Keaton, Chaplin and the other early screen comedians, and although he never says that out loud, either, it becomes clear in a gradual, unforced way, as he incorporates bits from their films into his daily life.
If I had been reading the screenplay of "Benny and Joon," I would have started to form ominous misgivings at about this point, since the conceit of bringing a character like Sam into the story seems a little too precious. But Depp pulls it off. In "
Edward Scissorhands
" he demonstrated two of the skills that are crucial to his performance in "Benny and Joon": He was able to build an essentially wordless performance out of expression and gesture, and he had natural physical grace.
Here, without ever explaining himself, he simply behaves sometimes in the real world in the way Keaton and Chaplin behaved in their movie worlds.
There is a moment at a lunch counter, for example, when he sticks two forks into two dinner rolls, holds them under his chin, and moves them to suggest that the rolls are his feet, and he is dancing. It\s a steal from "The Gold Rush," but done with an offhand charm that makes it work all over again.
Sam charms Joon out of her self-absorption, and before long, inevitably, they fall in love. But this is not a romance made in heaven, because neither Sam nor Joon is fitted with all the tools useful for surviving in the modern world.
Benny is enraged at the news that they love each other, because he believes Joon cannot live independently - and also because, having devoted his life to caring for her, he feels a certain possessiveness. A psychiatrist C. C. H. Pounder, from "
Bagdad Cafe
" also has serious reservations.
Because "Benny and Joon" is the kind of movie it is, the problems of reality, while occasionally present, are not entirely given their due. Sam exists so resolutely in his own world that it is even a little startling when, at one point, he quietly asks, "How sick is she?" We can glimpse for a second, under his clown facade, his own take on reality. Then his charming persona slides back into place.
Most people would side with Benny in his opposition to the talk of marriage, but the movie suggests that love and magic can overcome madness, and for at least the length of the film I was prepared to accept that. Much of the credit for that goes to Depp, who takes a character that might have seemed unplayable on paper, and makes him into the kind of enchanter who might be able to heal Joon. Mary Stuart Masterson, from "
Fried Green Tomatoes
" usually plays commonsensical, sane characters; this time she shows Joon able to swing in an instant from calm to rage, picking on little things that set her off. It\s a convincing performance.
"And Aidan Quinn, in a somewhat thankless role as the movies reality base and opponent of love, never plays a scene simply for its obvious point, but lets us see that his love for his sister underlies all of his decisions."
"Benny and Joon" is a tough sell. Younger moviegoers these days seem to shy away from complexities, which is why the movie and its advertising all shy away from any implication of mental illness. The film is being sold as an offbeat romance between a couple of lovable kooks. I was relieved to discover it was about so much more than that.

Rise of the Planet of the Apes 2011 Cast
James Franco as Will Rodman
Freida Pinto as Caroline
John Lithgow as Mr. Rodman
Brian Cox as John Landon
Tom Felton as Dodge Landon
Directed by Rupert Wyatt
Written by Rick Jaffa
Amanda Silver Based on the novel by
Pierre Boulle Action, Drama, Science Fiction
Rated PG-13 for violence, terror, some sexuality and brief strong language
105 minutes "Rise of the Planet of the Apes" is a title suggesting need for a sequel, because in this film, the chimpanzees only get as far as crossing the Golden Gate Bridge. Today San Francisco, tomorrow the world. It develops the notion that chimps, who as we know are only a few genes separated from humans anyway, require only a new wonder drug to become fairly good at chess.
The film opens at a big drug company, where Will Rodman 
James Franco
" is a scientist who has developed ALZ 112, a possible treatment for Alzheimers. He tests it on chimpanzees, who unexpectedly zoom up the IQ chart and develop enormous sign-language vocabularies."
Alas, a test animal goes berserk and attacks a board meeting, and the experiment is called off — odd, because scientists should have known what the rest of us know, which is that chimps are charming until they sexually mature, after which they develop the characteristics of, well, wild animals. Assuming that ALZ 112 works, it might be safe to test on Grandpa without running much of a risk of his pounding on people with his walker.
Will is touched by the plight of a helpless baby chimp and takes him home "for a few days." Days turn to weeks and years, and Caesar exhibits incredible intelligence and the body language of a Marcel Marceau. During the same period, Will grows close with a primatologist named Caroline 
Freida Pinto
", who becomes Caesars surrogate mother. Whether she becomes Wills surrogate wife is an excellent question; the movie displays the usual PG-13 shyness about intimate details; when she kisses him some years into their relationship, its as if shes finally making a statement. I expected her to be employed as a device for getting lots of info about chimps into the dialogue, but no, she doesnt know much more than anyone else."
By a benign coincidence, the fascinating documentary "
Project Nim
" has been playing around the country and provides a sort of briefing for this film. It also has much more interesting relationships involving men and women, and humans and apes. It teaches us that chimps may be very smart and friendly, but they are not humans, and when they grow large, can turn nasty. The chimp experts in this movie can be seen running around the Golden Gate Bridge crying out "Caesar! Caesar!" long after they should have realized Caesar has played his last pawn to K4.
That said, the movie has its pleasures, although human intelligence is not one of them. Caesar, to begin with, is a wonderfully executed character, a product of special effects and a motion-capture performance by
Andy Serkis
, who earlier gave us Gollum in "Lord of the Rings" and returns in the upcoming "The Hobbit". One never knows exactly where the human ends and the effects begin, but Serkis and/or Caesar gives the best performance in the movie.
"James Franco struggles with an underwritten role that shies away from philosophical and ethical questions and limits itself to plot points in basic English. Freida Pintos Caroline the pri\xadmatologist is no Dian Fossey, and indeed gives no hints that she has even heard of her, but, man, is she gorgeous."
Tom Felton
plays a keeper in a primate facility who is deliberately cruel to his chimps, which is unlikely but serves a purpose. People who make faces at chimpanzees are telling us more about themselves than they should share. Oh, and
John Lithgow
"is here as the heros dad, once a beloved music teacher, now disappearing into Alzheimers. He is in the film to do exactly what he does and apparently not one thing more."
"Theres a big climactic action scene that is more engaging than the countless similar scenes Ive seen with zombies. And a conclusion that is uplifting and inspiring for the apes, I assume, and proves that Caesar is so smart that when he sees a place from another place, he knows how to find his way back to the other place from the first one, which is what humans need GPS for."
Bottom line: This is the movie you may have been expecting. No less, no more.

Good Will Hunting 1997 Cast
Matt Damon as Will
Robin Williams as Sean McGuire
Ben Affleck as Chuckie
Minnie Driver as Skylar
Stellan Skarsgard as Lambeau
Directed by Gus Van Sant
Written by Matt Damon
Ben Affleck Drama, Indie, Romance
Rated R For Strong Language, Including Some Sex-Related Dialogue
125 minutes It must be heartbreaking to be able to appreciate true genius and yet fall just short of it yourself. A man can spend his entire life studying to be a mathematician--and yet watch helplessly while a high school dropout, a janitor, scribbles down the answers to questions the professor is baffled by.
"Its also heartbreaking when genius wont recognize itself, and thats the most baffling problem of all in “Good Will Hunting,” the smart, involving story of a working-class kid from Boston."
The film stars
Matt Damon
as a janitor at MIT who likes to party and hang around the old neighborhood and whose reading consists of downloading the contents of whole libraries into his photographic memory.
Stellan Skarsgard
the husband in “
Breaking the Waves
” plays Lambeau, the professor, who offers a prize to any student who can solve a difficult problem. The next morning, the answer is written on a blackboard standing in the hall.
"Who claims credit? None of the students does. A few days later, Lambeau catches Will Hunting Damon at the board and realizes hes the author--a natural mathematical genius who can intuitively see through the thorniest problems. Lambeau wants to help Will, to get him into school, maybe, or collaborate with him. But before that can take place, Will and some buddies are cruising the old neighborhood and beat up a guy. Will also hammers on the cops a little and is jailed."
"Hes a tough nut. He sees nothing wrong with spending his whole life hanging out with his friends, quaffing a few beers, holding down a blue-collar job. He sees romance in being an honest bricklayer, but none in being a professor of mathematics--maybe because bricklaying is work, and, for him, math isnt."
"“Good Will Hunting” is the story of how this kids life edges toward self-destruction and how four people try to haul him back. One is Lambeau, who gets probation for Will with a promise that hell find him help and counseling."
One is Sean McGuire 
Robin Williams
", Lambeaus college roommate, now a community college professor who has messed up his own life, but is a gifted counselor. One is Skylar "
Minnie Driver
, a British student at Harvard, who falls in love with Will and tries to help him. And one is Chuckie 
Ben Affleck
", Wills friend since childhood, who tells him: “Youre sitting on a winning lottery ticket. It would be an insult to us if youre still around here in 20 years.” True, but Will doesnt see it that way. His reluctance to embrace the opportunity at MIT is based partly on class pride it would be betraying his buddies and the old neighborhood and partly on old psychic wounds. And it is only through breaking through to those scars and sharing some of his own that McGuire, the counselor, is able to help him. Robin Williams gives one of his best performances as McGuire, especially in a scene where he finally gets the kid to repeat, “Its not my fault.” “Good Will Hunting” perhaps found some of its inspiration in the lives of its makers. The movie was co-written by Damon and Affleck, who grew up in Boston, who are childhood friends, and who both took youthful natural talents and used them to find success as actors. Its tempting to find parallels between their lives and the characters--and tempting, too, to watch the scenes between Damon and Driver with the knowledge that they fell in love while making the movie."
"The Will Hunting character is so much in the foreground that its easy to miss a parallel relationship: Lambeau and McGuire also are old friends who have fought because of old angers and insecurities. In a sense, by bringing the troubled counselor and the troublesome janitor together, the professor helps to heal both of them."
The film has a good ear for the way these characters might really talk.
It was directed by
Gus
Van Sant
“
Drugstore Cowboy
,” “
To Die For
"”, who sometimes seems to have perfect pitch when it comes to dialogue; look at the scene where Matt and Skylar break up and say hurtful things, and see how clear he makes it that Matt is pushing her away because he doesnt think he deserves her."
"The outcome of the movie is fairly predictable; so is the whole story, really. Its the individual moments, not the payoff, that make it so effective."
“Good Will Hunting” has been rather inexplicably compared to “Rainman,” although “Rainman” was about an autistic character who cannot and does not change, and “Good Will Hunting” is about a genius who can change, and grow, if he chooses to.
"True, they can both do quick math in their heads. But Will Hunting is not an idiot savant or some kind of lovable curiosity; hes a smart man who knows hes smart but pulls back from challenges because he was beaten down once too often as a child."
"Here is a character who has four friends who love and want to help him, and hes threatened by their help because it means abandoning all of his old, sick, dysfunctional defense mechanisms."
"As Louis Armstrong once said, “Theres some folks, that, if they dont know, you cant tell em.” This movie is about whether Will is one of those folks."

Bed Of Roses 1996 Cast
Christian Slater as Lewis
Mary Stuart Masterson as Lisa
Pamela Segall as Kim
Josh Brolin as Danny
Written and Directed by Michael Goldenberg
Drama, Romance Rated PG
For Mild Language and Thematic Elements 87 minutes
"Bed of Roses" tells a sappy story about two sad sacks\rwho get more or less what they deserve - each other. It\s one of those weepers\rthat might have made sense in the 1930s, with big stars to let us know it was\ronly kidding. But I\m afraid this movie is very serious about its romance,\rwhich is so earnest and sweet that I kept hoping at least one of the lovers\rwould turn out to be a slasher.
The\rfilm opens with a day in the life of Lisa 
Mary Stuart Masterson
, a top-level\rexecutive whose private life is empty despite the presence or more often the\rabsence of a boyfriend. Both of them are workaholics, making it convenient to\rgo with a person who has no time for them. One day Lisa gets some news: A man\rnamed Stanley has died in Philadelphia. On the same day, she receives a\rmysterious delivery of flowers, from an anonymous admirer.
We\rlearn more about Stanley later: He was Lisa\s abusive adoptive father, who\rreared her after she was abandoned at an airport. Stanley\s wife died soon\rafter the adoption; Lisa is a woman with more missing parents than most. There\ris even a flashback to little Lisa asking the drunken, sullen Stanley,\r"When\s my birthday?" and him growling, "You don\t have a\rbirthday." Back to the present. Who are the flowers from? She\rcross-examines the deliveryman, named Lewis 
Christian Slater
. He claims to\rknow nothing, but later confesses the flowers are from him.
He\rtakes long walks at night, you see, to try to forget the pain of his wife and\rchild having died, and one day he saw her standing in her window, and fell in\rlove. Oh, and he owns the florist shop.
"Lisa\rand Lewis are both almost bent with the weight of their misfortunes, but they\rbegin to date, and the progress of their relationship is charted by Lisas best\rfriend, Kim "
Pamela Segall
, who is one of those convenient characters put into\rmovies so the heroine will have someone to talk to while providing innermost thoughts that otherwise would have to\rgo into voice-over narration.
At\rleast Segall brings bright energy to the role; we have a feeling that if the\rflowers had been delivered to Kim she would have had better things to do than\rspend three days trying to find out who sent them. Far be it from me to reveal\rwhat happens as the romance progresses. But I\m serious about thinking one of\rthem would turn out to be a dangerous nut. Usually, in modern movies, romantic\rsetups like this are played so straight only when a nasty surprise is going to\rpop up later see "
Fatal Attraction
".
"Is\rhe too good to be true? Does her moody exterior conceal dangerous aberrations?\rAlas, no. The movie hinges on that most reliable of modern romantic clichés,\rthe Fear of Commitment. How can she commit to romance when she has been abused\rby Stanley and grown up to be a workaholic? And how can he commit, when he is\rafraid all will end in disaster, as it did with his first wife? Just to give\ryou a sample of the movies goofiness, the two of them spend their first date\rdelivering flowers. See, even though Lewis owns the shop, he likes to deliver\rthe flowers himself, just to see peoples faces light up when they receive\rthem. What a sensitive guy."
"The\ractors are wasted on this material, which moves forward with grave\rdeliberation. Mary Stuart Masterson, who specializes in spunk and fortitude,\rdoesnt seem right as an unfocused, self-pitying loser. And Christian Slater is\rbetter as a cool, laconic outsider than as a dreamer with a song in his heart.\rMaybe one reason they seem unconvincing is that the story lays it on so thick;\rtheyre buried by the material."

Where The River Runs Black 1986 Cast
Alessandro Rabelo as Lazaro
Charles Durning "as Father OReilly"
Ajay Naidu as Segundo
Divana Brandao as Eagle Woman
Peter Horton as Father Mahoney
Conchata Ferrell as Mother Marta
Directed by Christopher Cain
Produced by Joe Roth
Harry Ufland Screenplay by
Peter Silverman Neal Jimenez
By David Kendall Edited by
Richard Chew Music by
James Horner Adventure
Rated PG 97 minutes
Here is a fable with the most unlikely ingredients, and yet, like all fables, it will work if we allow it to.
"Where the River Runs Black" takes place along an isolated Brazilian river system, where the streams penetrate the heart of darkness. The Indian tribes that inhabit that world tell of a freshwater dolphin that transforms itself into a beautiful woman. She seduces a young man and a child is born to them. It is said that the child, half human and half dolphin, can still be seen swimming where the river runs black.
The story is told in flashback, and the narrator is a missionary priest 
Charles Durning
. At first, we wonder why there needs to be a narrator. But, of course, legends always need narrators, because after magical events have transformed all of the main characters, there has to be somebody left for the witnesses to tell the story to.
And so we see Durning, silently, solemnly sitting under an umbrella that shields him from the jungle sun, being paddled upstream for a meeting with the young priest 
Peter Horton
 who has established a mission there. The jungle atmosphere is extraordinary - the entire movie was shot on location in the Brazilian rain forest - and in such locations, we can almost believe magical legends because so little else seems real.
The young priest is filled with plans. He wants to build a hospital and a school. The older priest advises patience and returns to the city. Then the young man sets out to penetrate deeper into the jungle, and that is where he sees a young maiden 
Divana Brandao
 swimming in a pool. She seduces him in a scene of great silence and seriousness, and then, as he leaves the enchanted place, his little boat is swamped by a giant river snake, and he is drowned. You may interpret the snake as you wish. A child is born to the woman. Mother and child live in nature as happy as a couple of models for Jean Jacques Rousseau, until evil businessmen come into the district looking for mineral wealth. They kill the mother and try to kill the little boy, but he survives and makes his way to the big city, where eventually he comes under the care of Durning. He is a good little boy, quiet and solemn, and the priest tries to teach him. But this child is not meant for the world of cities; he is, after all, half dolphin.
Like so many Latin American stories, this one has a certain smooth, hypnotic charm. There is more than magic and legend here. There also is the feeling of predestination, the feeling that the whole story was over long before it began to be told. Told in the wrong way, "Where the River Runs Black" could very easily seem silly. But the director,
Christopher Cain
, tells it with a dreamy inevitability, and for me, at least, the spell worked.
Cain\s first film was "The Stone Boy," a heartbreaking, realistic film about a young boy who accidentially kills his brother with a shotgun and then must somehow live with the consequences. This time, Cain once again uses silences and expressions and the looks in eyes to show us a young boy who has seen more than he can ever explain.

Van Helsing 2004 Cast
Hugh Jackman as Gabriel Van Helsing
Kate Beckinsale as Anna Valerious
Richard Roxburgh as Count Dracula
David Wenham as Carl
Will Kemp as Velkan Valerious
Shuler Hensley "as Frankensteins Monster"
"Kevin J. OConnor" as Igor
Samuel West as Dr. Frankenstein
Robbie Coltrane as Mr. Hyde
Written and directed by Stephen Sommers
Action, Adventure, Drama, Horror, Science Fiction Rated PG-13
for non-stop creature action violence, frightening images and sensuality 131 minutes
"
The zombies were having fun
The party had just begun
The guests included Wolf Man
Dracula and his son"
-- "Monster Mash," by Bobby "Boris" Pickett
Strange that a movie so eager to entertain would forget to play "Monster Mash" over the end credits. There have been countless movies uniting two monsters "Frankenstein Meets the Wolf Man," "King Kong vs. Godzilla," etc., but "Van Helsing" convenes Frankenstein, his Monster, Count Dracula, the Wolf Man, Igor, Van Helsing the vampire hunter, assorted other werewolves, werebats and vampires, and even Mr. Hyde, who as a bonus seems to think he is the Hunchback of Notre Dame.
"The movie is like a Greatest Hits compilation; its assembled like Frankensteins Monster, from spare parts stitched together and brought to life with electricity, plus lots of computer-generated images. The plot depends on Draculas desperate need to discover the secret of Frankensteins Monster, because he can use it to bring his countless offspring to life. Because Dracula "
Richard Roxburgh
 and his vampire brides are all dead, they cannot give birth, of course, to live children.
That they give birth at all is somewhat remarkable, although perhaps the process is unorthodox, since his dead offspring hang from a subterranean ceiling wrapped in cocoons that made me think, for some reason, of bagworms, which I spent many a summer hand-picking off the evergreens under the enthusiastic direction of my father.
Van Helsing 
Hugh Jackman
, Wolverine in the "
X-Men
" movies is sometimes portrayed as young, sometimes old in the Dracula movies. Here he\s a professional monster-killer with a Phantom of the Opera hat, who picks up a dedicated friar named Carl 
David Wenham
 as his sidekick. His first assignment is to track down Mr. Hyde 
Robbie Coltrane
", who now lives in the Notre Dame cathedral and ventures out for murder. That job does not end as planned, so Van Helsing then moves on to the Vatican City to get instructions and and be supplied with high-tech weapons by the ecclesiastical equivalent of James Bonds Q."
"Next stop: Transylvania, where the movie opened with a virtuoso b&w sequence showing a local mob waving pitchforks and torches and hounding Frankensteins Monster into a windmill, which is set ablaze. We know, having seen the old movies, that the Monster will survive, but the mob has worked itself into such a frenzy that when Van Helsing and Carl arrive in the village, they are almost forked and burnt just on general principles. What saves them is an attack by three flying vampiresses, who like to scoop up their victims and fly off to savor their blood; Van Helsing fights them using a device that fires arrows like a machinegun."
And that leads to his meeting the beautiful Anna Valerious 
Kate Beckinsale
, who with her brother Velkan 
Will Kemp
 represents the last of nine generations of a family who will never find eternal rest until it vanquishes Dracula. Conveniently, if you kill Dracula, all the vampires he created will also die. Anna is at first suspicious of Van Helsing, but soon they are partners in vengeance, and the rest of the plot there is a whole lot of it I will leave you to discover for yourselves.
The director,
Stephen Sommers
, began his career sedately, directing a very nice "Adventures of Huckleberry Finn" 1993 and the entertaining "Jungle Book" 1994. Then Victor Frankenstein must have strapped him to the gurney and turned on the juice, because he made a U-turn into thrillers, with "
Deep Rising
" 1998, where a giant squid attacks a cruise ship, and "
The Mummy
" 1999 and "
The Mummy Returns
" 2001, introducing
The Rock
as The Scorpion King. Now comes "Van Helsing," which employs the ultimate resources of CGI to create a world that is violent and hectic, bizarre and entertaining, and sometimes very beautiful.
"CGI can get a little boring when it allows characters to fall hundreds of feet and somehow survive, or when they swoop at the ends of ropes as well as Spider-Man, but without Spideys superpowers. But they can also be used to create a visual feast, and here the cinematography by"
Allen Daviau
"E.T." and the production design by Allen Cameron join with Sommers\ imagination for spectacular sights. The best is a masked ball in Budapest, which is part real the musicians balancing on balls, the waiters circling on unicycles and part fabricated in the computer. Whatever. It\s a remarkable scene, and will reward study on the DVD. So will the extraordinary coach chase.
I also liked the movie\s recreation of Victor Frankenstein\s laboratory, which has been a favorite of production designers, art directors and set decorators since time immemorial Mel Books\ "
Young Frankenstein
" recycled the actual sets built for James Whale\s "The Bride of Frankenstein". Here Frankenstein lives in a towering gothic castle, just down the road from Dracula, and the mechanism lifts the Monsters to unimaginable heights to expose him to lightning bolts. There are also plentiful crypts, stygian passages, etc., and a library in which a painting revolves, perhaps in tribute to Brooks\ revolving bookcase.
The screenplay by Sommers has humor but restrains itself; the best touches are the quiet ones, as when the friar objects to accompanying Van Helsing "But I\m not a field man," he insists and when the Monster somewhat unexpectedly recites the 23rd Psalm.
At the outset, we may fear Sommers is simply going for f/x overkill, but by the end, he has somehow succeeded in assembling all his monsters and plot threads into a high-voltage climax. "Van Helsing" is silly and spectacular, and fun.

Gloria 1980 Directed by
John Cassavetes Produced by
Sam Shaw Screenplay by
Cassavetes Action, Crime, Drama, Thriller
Rated PG 121 minutes
Well, it\s a cute idea for a movie, and maybe that\s why they\ve had this particular idea so often. You start with tough-talking, streetwise gangster types, you hook them up with a little kid, you put them in fear of their lives, and then you milk the situation for poignancy, pathos, excitement, comedy and anything else that turns up. It\s the basic situation of "
Little Miss Marker
," the Damon Runyon story that has been filmed three times. And now
John Cassavetes
tells it again in Gloria. The twists this time: The tough-talking gangster type is a woman, and the kid is Puerto Rican. Cassavetes has cast his wife,
Gena Rowlands
", in the title role, and its an infectious performance--if infectious is the word to describe a chain-smoking dame who charges around town in her high heels, dragging a kid behind her."
"The kid is also well cast. Hes a youngster named"
John Adames
"who has dark hair and big eyes and a way of delivering his dialogue as if daring you to change one single word. Precisely because the material of this movie is so familiar, almost everything depends on the performances. And thats where Cassavetes saves the material and redeems the corniness of his story. Rowlands propels the action with such appealing nervous energy that we dont have the heart to stop and think how silly everything is."
The movie begins with a two-bit hoodlum 
Buck Henry
, an inexplicable casting choice barricaded in an apartment with his Puerto Rican wife 
Julie Carmen
 and their kids. Men are going to come through the door at any moment with guns blazing. There\s a knock on the door. It\s Rowlands, as the neighbor, with the somehow inevitable name of Gloria Swenson. She wants to borrow sugar. She winds up with the kid. She doesn\t want the kid. She doesn\t like kids, she tells Henry: "Especially your kids." But the kid tags along. There\s a shootout, the kid\s family is dead, and things get even more complicated when it turns out that Henry gave his kid a notebook that has information in it the mob will kill to retrieve.
"Thats the premise for the rest of the movie, which is a cat-and-mouse chase through the sleazier districts of New York and New Jersey."
Cassavetes has a nice eye for locale. There\s a crummy flophouse where the clerk tells Rowlands, "Just pick a room. They\re all open." There\s a garishly decorated love nest that Rowlands occasionally occupies with a mobster. There are bus stations, back alleys, dimly lit hallways and the kinds of bars that open at dawn and do most of their business by 9 a.m. That provides one of the movie\s best scenes. Gloria and the kid argue, Gloria tells the kid to split if that\s the way he feels, and then she marches into the bar, orders a beer, lights a cigarette and says to the bartender: "Listen. There are reasons why I can\t turn around and look ... but is there a little kid heading in here?" Cassavetes remains one of the most consistently interesting Hollywood mavericks. He makes money by acting and immediately spends it producing his own films. Most of them are passionately indulgent of the actors, who sometimes repay his indulgence with inspired performances. Rowlands won an Oscar nomination for Cassavetes\ "
A Woman Under the Influence
." His next picture starred
Ben Gazzara
in "The Killing of a Chinese Bookie" 1978, which has become an unseen, lost film--better, if the truth be known, than "Gloria," which is fun and engaging but slight. What saves this movie is Cassavetes\ reliance on a tried-and-true plot construction.
For once, his characters aren\t all over the map in nonstop dialogue, as they were in "
Husbands
," the talkathon he made in 1970 with
Peter Falk
, Gazzara and himself. "Gloria" is tough, sweet and goofy.

The Center of the World 2001 Cast
Peter Sarsgaard as Richard Longman
Molly Parker as Florence
Carla Gugino as Jerri
Balthazar Getty as Brian Pivano
Directed by Wayne Wang
Screenplay by Ellen Benjamin Wong
From A Story by Wang
Drama, Indie, Romance Rated NR
Scenes Of Sex and Nudity; Intended For Adults 86 minutes
Sex isn\t the subject of "The Center of the World." It\s the arena. The subject is making money, and the movie is about two people who hate their jobs. Richard 
Peter Sarsgaard
 is a computer whiz whose company is about to go public and make him a millionaire. Florence 
Molly Parker
" is a lap dancer in a strip club, but technically not a prostitute. You can be aroused by her, but you cant touch her. Richard is the same way. He skips a meeting with investors and disappears as his company floats its IPO. You can profit from his skills but you cant have him."
Here are two people who want to succeed only on their own terms. The big difference between them, as she points out, is "money. You have it and I don\t." As a sex worker, her strategy is to get the client\s money without giving herself. She meets Richard in a coffee shop. He finds out where she works, turns up and buys a lap dance. He\s fascinated. He asks her to go to Las Vegas for a weekend. She says she\s not that kind of person. "I can compensate you," he says. "Compensate" is a revealing word in this context. He offers her $10,000. She says he\ll have to observe her rules. He agrees.
He may actually be happy to agree. She\s spared him from performance anxiety. He gets the intrigue, the excitement, the mystique and her full attention, and avoids physical and psychological risk. Nice deal. Good for her, too, because she needs money but doesn\t think of herself as a prostitute she\s "really" a drummer in a rock band. Director
Wayne Wang
says his film was inspired by the strip clubs of the Silicon Valley. They bring together men who have too much money and no interest in relationships with women who have too little money and no interest in relationships.
"Sex supplies the stakes. Its the currency of the micro-economy created for a weekend by Richard and Flo. She manufactures sex, he consumes it, and cash flow is generated. When she goes a little further than her guidelines permit, thats like Alan Greenspan lowering interest rates. The casual observer may think the weekend is all about sex; more evolved viewers will notice that the sex is not very fulfilling, very original or very good; what is fascinating are the mind games. Theyre like negotiations. Flo is the better negotiator, but then of course shes the market-maker."
"In theory, a prostitute and her client form a closed system, in which everything in their private lives, even their real names, may be kept secret. Because Richard and Flo met socially before entering into their agreement, information leaked out. She knows hes about to make millions of dollars, although all she wants is $10,000. The commitment involved in getting the millions would interfere with her idea of herself. We in the audience get more information because we eavesdrop during their private moments; he deals by e-mail with partners who are enraged that he stiffed the investors and they hear is in Vegas with a hooker on the companys biggest day. She calls a Vegas friend named Jerri "
Carla Gugino
, who gives her technical advice; she tells Jerri she "kinda likes" the guy.
Now look at their sex. Her rules permit action only between 10 p.m. and 2 a.m. The rest of the time, they sight-see, visit restaurants, play video games. The sex in theory will not involve intercourse. They have connecting rooms. At 10 p.m. she throws open the doors, dressed dramatically in "erotic" clothes that are pretty routine. She does advanced versions of a lap dance. He wants to go further. "You want real?" she asks. "I\ll show you real." What she shows him is real, all right, but scant consolation for an onlooker.
At one point they practice something called "fire and ice," which involves ice cubes and hot sauce, and has been compared by credulous reviewers with the most famous scene in "
Last Tango in Paris
." The difference is, in "Last Tango" something was really happening between two unpaid and involved participants; in "The Center of the World," it\s erotic showbiz. Show me a sexual practice that involves ice cubes and hot sauce, and I will show you a sexual practice that would be improved without them. The movie has also been compared to "
Leaving Las Vegas
," but couldn\t be more different. That film was about agony and redemption, and the hooker was a healing angel. This movie is about two entrepreneurs.
The suspense in "The Center of the World" is not about whether Flo and Richard will have real sex. The suspense involves whether they\ll start to like each other. He tells her he\s in love, but guys always say that. She kinda likes him, but having started off in this way, can she ever have sex with him that will not seem, in some way, like a subtle extension of prostitution? To this intrigue is added another level when Jerri, the friend, visits their suite with a story of being beaten up. Is Richard being scammed by the two women? In a scenario like this, it\s impossible to figure out what\s real. Does Richard love Flo, or the erotic illusion she creates, or the freedom from responsibility she makes possible? Does Flo like Richard, or his money, or the gamesmanship of dancing closer to the flame? When they spontaneously find themselves turned on outside the four-hour time zone, is that real, or does it feed off the excitement of breaking the rules? The situation is complicated because all of their interruptus brinksmanship has been a turn-on. They\re only human.
"If you understand who the characters are and what theyre supposed to represent, the performances are right on the money. Flo is not supposed to be a sexy tart, and Richard is not supposed to be a lustful client. Theyre sides of the same coin and very much alike. You want real? This movie shows you real. For Richard and Flo, real is a weekend in Vegas trying to figure out what they really want and how much theyre willing to sell off in order to buy it."

